Excellent.
Everyone seated and in position, welcome Minister Brown.
Welcome director. Welcome. See Dr. Brownley.
Fantastic to have you all here.
We have you in here for one hour.
I'll let you make some introductory, uh, comments, minister,
and then we'll open it up to members
for questions. Thank you.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair
and thank you members of this committee.
And good morning. I wanna begin
by acknowledging the hard work
of the health workforce across the country
for the work and dedication.
During the 24, uh, 23 24 25, uh, financial year,
which this annual review is underway,
the government is incredibly grateful for their commitment
to delivering care for patients and putting patients first.
The annual report demonstrates
that while progress has been made,
there remains significant challenges in the health system.
The most pressing of these is wait times,
which remain the number one clinical risk.
And one of this government's top priorities to address
too many New Zealanders are still waiting too
long the care that they need.
This must change. That's why this government is focused on
restoring the basics, rebuilding a health system
that is transparent, accountable,
and relentlessly focused on
delivering outcomes for patients.
We've reinstated national health
targets to drive performance.
We've launched an elective surgery boost,
which saw more procedures delivered in the last quarter
of the 24 25 financial year than in any quarter.
In the past decade, we've begun work to expand,
extend urgent care services, especially in rural
and regional communities.
We're also making changes to restore local decision making.
The previous government's centralized bureaucratic health
reforms, stripped autonomy from communities.
We returning decision making
to health New Zealand's regional
and district levels where people closest
to patients are empowered to act.
A health system that is nationally
and regionally planned must be delivered locally
by the people who understand the community the best.
We also, at the same time, expecting value for money.
The government is investing record funding in health
and New Zealanders rightfully expect results.
That means, uh, delivering more care for patients,
improving access and outcomes,
and focusing on frontline service delivery.
And the past year, we've increased the frontline workforce
by around 750 full-time equivalents.
We've also seen a sharp reduction in the use of, uh,
consultants with spending down significantly meaning more
money for frontline care.
And short, while progress is underway,
we know hard work is far finished.
We'll keep pushing to deliver the outcomes.
New Zealanders deserve shorter wait times,
more accessible services,
and a health system that puts patients first. Thank
You. Thank you.
Minister members. Dr. Vera.
In the beginning of this year,
the departing director general was paid $365,000
over for 52 days work.
Is that good value for money?
Uh, well, um, as the member will be aware, that's a matter
for what the Public Service Commission.
Uh, it's not a matter for the Ministry
of Health or the Minister of Health.
It's a matter for the Public Service Commission.
Were any payments made to the Departing Director General,
uh, other than those listed
by the Public Service Commission?
Uh, as I said, I'm not, I'm only can refer you to
what the Public Service Commission, uh,
documents may, may say.
And ultimately, there'll be a annual review this year
as Public Service Commission.
And I suggest you put those
questions to the Public Service Commission.
But we will. But can you exclude that any other, uh,
can you rule out that any other payments were made
by the Ministry of Health, uh, monetary
or inkind, uh, related to the Department of Departure of the
Director General. I mean, the Public Service
Commissioner is the employer,
uh, not the Minister of Health.
And so I suggest you put those questions, uh, to the, um,
the Public Service Commission
Supplementary Mr.
Chair, what was the reason
for the departure of the director General?
Well, again, that the employer is the Public Service
Commissioner, and, uh,
I would suggest you put those questions to the,
It's just a mystery to you why someone got paid $360,000
52 days work.
Dr. Vel, I'm going to DR. Camp. Excellent. Thank you, man.
Can you who employs the director General Love Health?
The Public Service Commissioner employs the director
General Love Health as all CES of the core public service.
And so any questions in relation to that issue should be put
to the Public Service Commission. Okay.
No responsibility. So is the, um,
so they would be responsible
for any employment conditions for the
That is correct. So
all questions in relation to that line
of questioning should be put
to the Public Service Commissioner
to answer those questions.
Thank you. Primary question.
Yeah. Um, thank you.
Um, minister, you wrote to, uh,
many people last week talking about
how you wanted decentralization.
I think you, your words were, uh,
too many decisions are made by people
who are removed from the problems that the frontline right.
Trying to solve. It's causing significant frustration
for local districts and stifling innovation, et cetera.
And yet you allowed Tutu trust in Wellington to, uh,
not get funded at the local level.
Why have you not funded a service
that even Wellington Hospital has said would help
with its poor results when it comes
to meeting your wait time targets?
Well, well fir firstly, um, I,
I don't make decisions on individual
funding, uh, agreements.
Um, that is, uh, a matter for, for Health New Zealand.
And I would just, um, like to remind the member that, um,
you know, health New Zealand was an even organization
established by the previous government, which amalgamated,
uh, decision making into a centralized bureaucracy away from
local decision making by local communities.
And so, uh, that is something which the last
government chose to do.
Uh, the focus is expressed in the letter that I wrote
to the board, is that, uh, we need to go through a process
of devolution to ensure that, uh,
decisions are made at the right levels.
Uh, we have a nationally and regionally planned model, uh,
but it is locally delivered in district care,
is locally delivered in districts across the country.
And I expect, uh, the board to go through a process
of devolution to ensure that decisions are made
by local districts, uh, in order to enable access for
patients for the healthcare services, uh, that they deserve
and expect in their local community.
And so that is a process which I've asked the board,
uh, to, to go through.
But as I said, previous government, uh, chose to,
I've got effectively amalgamate decision making into a
centralized, uh,
bureaucracy taking decision making away from frontline
clinicians, uh, and from frontline communities.
Uh, and that has led to many
of the frustrations that are being experienced.
And my expectation is that, uh, health New Zealand now goes
through a devolution process in order to fix, fix that.
So, one of your very senior officials said on a public
zoom yesterday that conversations are ongoing
with Akima Tutu.
Does that mean that, that the, uh,
resourcing has devolved enough that if the frontline want
to keep that important service open,
that they will offer them a, a service contract given
that it costs the same, uh, to do one
of their one week programs around dealing with depression
and anxiety as it does
to stay one night in a bed in Wellington Hospital?
Look, I think, um, you know, in terms
of individual questions about individual contracts, um,
I would suggest that those questions should be put directly
to Health New Zealand, uh, in relation to
how decisions have been made or not made.
Um, as the Minister of Health,
I don't make individual decisions on contracts.
I set the expectations around
how the organization should run, what should be focused on.
I've been clear around my expectations,
and I expect Health New Zealand to go through a process
of devolution to enable those decisions
to be made at local levels so that, uh,
local communities can,
can focus on how to solve these problems.
But ultimately, there will always be decisions made.
You know, at the end of the day, it has to be someone
who makes a decision, and they will,
and they should be accountable
and responsible for the decisions make.
So why were your own officials then, uh,
giving indications to tutu
that there would be contracts forthcoming,
or that there could be, uh, a CC, for example,
sensitive claims referred to them?
Why, why were they under the impression
that there would be funding and then suddenly there wasn't?
This feels like a case of all care
and no responsibility with Yeah.
Each pointing the finger at the other way
between your officials and yourself.
Where is the accountability minister? Yeah,
I mean, I guess there's, um, you, you can try
and characterize that in in particular ways, ultimately,
help New Zealand, um, as an organization needs
to make decisions on which contracts it can fund
and which contracts it won't fund.
Um, there's always choices that need to be made in order
to get best outcomes and,
and also value for money for, uh, taxpayers investments.
Uh, there's choices that they need to make within that.
Uh, and, uh, as, as I said in the letter, I expect, uh,
a process of devolution to be undertaken, uh, that
that process is, is, is starting and it's underway.
It's not complete. Uh,
but my expectation is
that is a very important piece of work
that needs to happen. So what's gonna
Happen? Sorry,
sorry, sorry.
Yeah, I mean, I guess your question is about,
and this is about an annual review, about
what happened in the last financial year.
I mean, I guess if your questions are about what's
happening, uh, right now, those are,
those are good questions to ask.
Um, but I guess, as I said,
I don't make decisions about
individual contracts, but people are,
We've got a supplementary from Jenny Crot and,
and just to just stop, just, just wait, just wait.
We've got a primary and then three subs, and then
after that, if other people have got subs, we'll go
to them just like we do in the house.
So please just keep it orderly in
that fashion. Jenny. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, and thank
you minister for, for being here today.
Um, we've talked about, um, devolving dec
decision making back to the regions, um,
and the expectation.
Could you outline what your expectation of
what this is gonna look like?
Um, when do you expect, um, that piece of work
to get needed?
When will there be a man management structure put in place
that will actually give these regional leaders real power?
Yeah. So that process, uh,
in many ways has already started.
Um, we established the four regions for Health New Zealand.
So we have four regions, three in the north island,
and then the south island has, is one,
one entire region, TY Pmu.
Uh, and so the four regions have been established
with regional leadership teams.
Uh, we have then 20 districts underneath those.
Uh, and the work of devolution is already underway
to put those decisions back in the hands of those regions
and districts, uh, within a nationally planned framework.
Um, I, uh, the board is,
is putting in place a devolution policy, uh, this month,
which will then outline the next phase.
And the next stages are in devolution around
what decisions are made at a national level,
what decisions are made at a regional level,
and then what decisions are made at a local level.
So there's real clarity
and then accountability around those decisions, uh,
to enable the organization
to move forward to the next phase.
Um, but again, as, as I said to to, to previous questions,
I mean, it's very, it's one thing to establish, uh,
an organization and put a letterhead on top.
You know, that's what the previous government did.
They established Health New Zealand, put a letterhead on top
and, and then try to say job done.
Uh, actually the real hard work is
how do you actually make this organization work to deliver
for patients and have a real focus on frontline care
and actually improve outcomes.
And that's where the real hard work, uh, is required,
whether it's around devolution policy, uh, whether it's
around, um, uh, making sure that we are, we are, uh,
putting in place singular, uh, data
and digital systems, you know, 6,000 data
and digital systems across Health New Zealand, one
for every 15 staff.
Um, we need to have, we have a real focus.
That's why we released the digital investment plan.
Uh, there's a whole range of things that we need
to make sure we are strengthening
and delivering across the organization, so it is able
to deliver more care more efficiently
so the public can access care in a
more timely quality manner.
And that's the hard work that we've got underway.
Just final supplement. Okay. Thank, thank you.
Um, in terms of, um,
feedback you've received about devolving power down
to the regions, can you speak to any of that?
Look, I think there's a real desire from the organization,
uh, for, for decisions to be made closer to, um, those
who are providing the care, uh,
in the districts and in the regions.
And there's real, uh,
desire from frontline clinicians as I travel the country.
Um, it's a real, um, area that they want to see take place,
and they want to see take place quickly.
That's the expectation I've outlined in my leader
of expectation, um, so that we can ensure that patients are,
uh, are treated in a more timely manner, uh,
that decisions are made as close to the patient as possible,
uh, and that those districts
and regions are then able to provide, uh,
that consistent level of care across
those districts and regions as well.
So there's a lot of desire for this to happen, uh,
and we have set that very clearly out
in our letter of expectations.
And the board, I know is very focused on achieving that.
Okay. I've got a FEWS here.
I'll go through them so everyone knows where they stand.
We've got Carlos, Debbie, and Asha with ss,
and then we have primaries from Hamish, Debbie, Asha,
Carlos, and hoa.
Thank you, Mr. She, since you're talking about funding
decision, how is the government ensure taxpayer money
is used efficiently?
Yeah, look, I think, um, there's a real focus to make sure
that Health New Zealand is operating, one of all
Is that a supplementary on this
question? That actually a,
I'm not sure that it is.
Oh, the original question is talk about the funding
decision and then, um, you know, why,
why they make the funding decision. So that's
What It sounds like a primary
to me, I think point there.
So I'll take my Son. You've got one coming up.
Uh, and we've got a S here.
Yep. Thanks. Um, I, I, understanding the minister's desire
to, um, devolution, which is right, why is it
that the minister has devolved
and is committed to a devolvement, um, devolution strategy,
but has centralized Maori health back under the crown?
Uh, so we've, we've, we've, we've got legislation
before Parliament, uh, which is looking at the role of
the Ho Maori Advisory Committee
and the independent Maori, uh, partnership boards.
Uh, the role that we see there is a, a very important role
for both, uh, to play at both a local and national level.
The IMP Bs clearly have an important role at a local level
to engage with local iwi and hapu
and to ensure that you're in their power, uh, put forward
to the decision making at a local level.
It comes to policies
and advisory At a national level,
the Ho Maori Advisory Committee has an important role.
We wanna make sure that the, uh, advice
that is brought forward by
and where policy changes can be made.
IBS have a very clear process by which they can put
that forward to the Ho Maori Advisory Committee,
which takes a national approach,
and then can put that advice directly to either me all
as the minister and or the,
or the Board of Health New Zealand.
Uh, and that's the intention of the legislation,
which I know is going through parliament.
I think, um, I understand the process
that's currently underway.
Um, the question was specifically why is one part,
the minister committed to a very, um,
in depth devolution strategy and process,
and it's been really quite critical of Health New Zealand,
um, but is prepared to follow a centralized
strategy when it comes to Maori Health.
Okay. What is the difference, I guess, is why,
what I'm looking for and why these two different approaches?
And if we are going back to basics, which is
what you said at the beginning of your speech,
why isn't the basics for the minister surely investing
and supporting the Maum equities
that they're experiencing in health?
Well, as I said, the, the IBS have a very important role
at the district level to provide advice
and to input into plans at a local level, uh, when it comes
to policy and changes
that may be advocated at a national level.
Uh, the whole Maori Maori advisory committee is having a
strengthened role to engage directly with IBS
to make sure their voices are being heard, uh, both
by the minister and also by the, uh,
by the Board of Health New Zealand.
So my view is strengthening their role, uh, to work with the
IPVs, uh, to be able to provide that, that voice and that.
So can I just clarify if, I'm not sure if I'm
through the chair, I just, just I understand, um,
the process and the comms strategy
and, um, what your commitment is to hearing that view.
What I'm trying
to understand is why is the minister taking an opposite
approach to everything else he's saying in health,
devolution, devolve, bring it back out to the regions,
but when it comes to Maori health income outcomes,
he's actually taking a centralized approach.
No, I just, and not having to now go through extra loops
and hoops to be able to engage.
That's not what you supplementary Mr. Chair.
Yeah. Mean I disagree
with the characterization of, of the question.
We are very much focused on it.
Just during the role of the IP visas is very clearly,
I mean, I guess, minister, why are you taking two
different approaches?
We're not, these are devolution here for every other part
of health to go out to the regions,
but when it comes to Maori, you have a very clear,
very clear, centralized approach, almost to the point
of collapsing any
of the relationship regionally done by Maori.
Well, I, I, I, as I said, I don't agree
with the characterization of your question.
The, the leader of expectations
around the operational decision making of
how Health New Zealand operates as an organization.
The role of the IPVs
and the ude Ma Maori Advisory Committee is to provide advice
and input into plans, uh, and into policies.
Uh, and we are being clear about what their roles are, um,
in terms of what they should be, uh,
supporting Health New Zealand in terms of
that advice for me as the minister.
But my expectations around Health New Zealanders,
how they should be operationally organizing
themselves as an organization.
Alright, we're gonna move on to primary soon,
but we've gotta s here
and Ana in ke you didn't hear this one as well.
So we'll go to, uh, Asha. First
Minister, can we cut out the political spin?
Will you commit to the clinical heads
of departments holding their own budget
in your devolution program?
Well, I've asked the Board of Health New Zealand
to put in place a devolution devolution policy, uh,
to ensure that decision making is, um, undertaken at, uh,
nationally and regionally planned, locally delivered, uh,
that will require, um, the, the budgetary decision making
and, uh, and a range of other decisions such as employment
decision making to, uh, go at a much lower level, uh,
To senior clinicians.
Well, ultimately, I've, I've, as I've said in the letter,
I expect their decisions to be made as close
to the patient as possible.
Uh, ultimately the board will go through a process
to put in place that, uh, that policy.
Um, I've set my expectations very clearly
that I expect decisions to be made as close
to the patients as possible.
Um, ultimately, um, that will allow for frontline
decision making to be able
to find efficiencies within budgets to do things differently
around what type of skill mix they may wish to use.
Um, my expectation is that that will lead
to more efficiency,
but also, um, more access for patients in different ways
of doing things and, uh, within a nationally
and regionally planned framework, which provides
for increased access for New Zealanders
to get the care that they need.
All right. We're going, I'm gonna do one more stuff
and it's with, and I'm gonna primaries after that.
The next one's with Hamish, followed by Debbie, followed
by Aisha, followed by Carlos Hona.
Ingrid. Cool.
Gil, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, my question is
to supplement off Debbie's Apartheid to the minister.
So, does the minister agree that there is a centralization
of power in the HA Maori advisory committee compared
to the regional voice, the mandated iwi voice
that was coming outta Iwi Maori partnership?
I would, I would express it
that the legislation provides clarity around the roles
of the ibs.
They have a very important role to continue
to engage locally and regionally, uh, both
with Health New Zealand and with local Iwi and Hapu.
When it comes to the advisor advice
that was received in relation to policies
or, uh, you know, national delivery of services, uh, then
my expectation is that the Holder Maori advisory committee
will engage closely with the IBS
and bring that advice forward both to me as the minister
and also to the Board of Health New Zealand.
And I think, um, you know,
there's a reason why the previous government put in place
the Ham Ma Maori Advisory Committee.
And in my view, we are, yes, we are both clarifying the role
of the ibs and strengthening the role of the HO
and MA Maori Advisory Committee to work with ibs so
that their voices are brought forward in a coordinated way
to both the minister and also to, um, to the board.
But I continue to engage with ibs, uh,
that is an important role coordinated, um,
that the supplementary that is, that is, uh,
that has continued to, to take place. Alright,
Last, Um, supplementary.
Yeah, supplementary.
So minister and, um, in considering the role
of the URA Maori Advisory Committee
and knowing it's ministerially appointed versus
iwi mandated, how is the HA Maori advisory committee
accountable to Kiwi Maori?
Hmm. What has an important role to ensure
that it is engaging closely with the IBBs?
Uh, is, is in the draft legislation, uh,
which is going through the house.
Alright. Primary, thank you, minister.
Um, this government has reinstated national health targets.
Can you outline why they're so important?
Well, I think the, the first point, um, is
that we have seen, uh, we saw significant decline in the,
um, delivery of, uh, timely healthcare
for patients in the previous six years.
Health targets are about ensuring
that there is accountability for the system, uh,
but also about making sure that, um,
there's a real focus on the needs of patients.
And so we have reestablished the health targets, uh,
which are about focusing the health system on those need,
the need of patients, uh,
and that then helps to drive the delivery
of services which are required.
And I think one of the, um, one of the,
the key targets is our target around, uh,
national immunization rates, uh, which fell significantly.
Um, in the previous six years.
Uh, we have started to see a significant improvement.
There's still a long way to go, uh,
but with the recent, uh,
measles outbreak highlights the need
to have very clear targets to drive performance
around improvement so that we can protect our children,
our tam, uh,
and ensure that we are improving
health outcomes for New Zealanders.
And that health target had the biggest
improvement in the last financial year.
I think we, from about 76, uh, percent
of two year olds being immunized up to around 82%
of children, uh, being immunized,
Significant Improvement.
Uh, but I do acknowledge there's still a very long way
to go, uh, in order to ensure
that all New Zealanders getting access
to time equality healthcare they need. Mm-hmm.
So, um, also one of the targets is, uh, first assessment.
Um, what, what progress has been made on that health target?
So there's two, two targets in relation
to first special appointment, which in terms
of elective treatment or planned care,
first special appointments and, uh, elective treatments.
Um, we have seen, uh, both
of those meet the milestone target.
Um, but on the first
to acknowledge there's still too many New Zealanders
waiting, uh, too long for the care that they need, uh,
we have started to see a reduction in those wait lists,
which grew substantially over the previous six years.
Uh, there's still a long way to go.
Too many New Zealanders are waiting too long
for the care that they need.
Uh, we're very focused on reducing, uh,
those wait, those wait times.
Uh, for elective treatment, as I said in my opening remarks,
uh, we had a very, uh, we had the,
the largest performance in number
of elective treatments in a particular quarter in Q4
of the previous financial year, um, over the last 10 years.
That was significant, uh, real significant delivery.
Uh, and we will continue to have that focus
with the elected first continuing so that we can get, uh,
the reduction of the wait lists
that are needed on those elective treatment wait lists.
Thank you. We've gotta supplement through
Hana first, and then you, Carlos,
We talk about one Off health.
Carlos was in first. And then
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, in supplementing off this, you mentioned
and spoke about, you know, measles preparedness.
Um, just referencing back to a cabinet paper in May, uh,
where it was shared that, you know, we need to gear up, um,
the health system and readiness, uh, for a potential wider,
um, measles outbreak.
And knowing that, you know,
there were learnings from the 2019, uh,
measles outbreak whereby the system didn't have sufficient
resource and support specifically to target Maori
and Pacific communities
and wanting to invite the minister to tell us about, well,
what, what has been the resource allocated, uh,
into the measles outbreak space to date.
Uh, but also what is the Pacific communities? And I have,
Look, that's really a really good question.
Uh, I think there's been a significant amount
of preparedness, uh, for potential measles outbreaks.
And we have had a number of incursions,
and obviously we've had the recent outbreak,
which I think is, um, had 22, uh,
22 cases, 21 of 'em are currently non-active.
Uh, there was one additional case reported over the weekend.
Um, one of the key things obviously has been the
focus on immunization.
And, uh, one of the key areas working particularly
with the Maori community has been the immunization
immunizing our tiki program, working with Maori providers
to increase immunization rates
and a real focus, uh, in our Maori communities.
Uh, there has also been the, uh, work
with our Pacific Health, uh, providers
who have played a really, uh, critical role in improving
the immunization rate in our Pacifica community.
Um, we have a much larger stock of vaccine, uh,
against measles in country than, uh, we had, I believe,
in the 2019 outbreak.
Uh, and we've brought forward, uh, significant stocks, uh,
to bolster that stock as we run our, our measles, uh,
immunization campaigns.
Um, there's been a real focus about making sure
that those campaigns are working across communities
and across ethnicity, ethnic groups, um,
both obviously Maori and Pacifica, but also, um, Asian
and other community groups as well, uh, to make sure
that we are getting that message out.
And of course, working with pharmacy
and primary care providers who are critically important
to the frontline delivery of those vaccinations.
And so there's no one thing, uh, there is multiple, uh,
multiple things which have been underway,
multiple actions underway to make sure that our, our
preparedness is, is, is,
is much better prepared than previously.
There's also been, um, there's also significant, uh,
significant resource being put towards contact tracing,
uh, at Health New Zealand.
I believe there's 180 people, uh,
and there's a surge capacity to go, I think over 200
in terms of the internal resource available, uh,
for contact tracing.
Um, that has been critically important, uh, to get
to the point that we are up at, uh,
currently with this outbreak.
Uh, and they have worked incredibly hard, uh, to make sure
that we are able to contact trace as quickly as possible,
uh, to isolate people who require isolation, uh,
and of course to, to make sure
that people's vaccination rates,
vaccination status is a big checked.
So a huge amount of work has gone underway in terms
of the measles outbreak.
And it is continuing, uh, to go underway, uh, as we, uh,
con currently are continuing to fight this outbreak,
Uh, to supplementary in relation to the measles outbreak,
the current outbreak, and wanting
to ask the minister specifically around Maori provision
and the way with which is their funding for them,
because they've been going into the homes while these have
been isolating compared
to the phone calls received from primary care
or someone within a health nz.
And what specific supports are being offered
to the Maori like health trust, those
who have been frontline in the K supporting these
who have been at breaking points, uh, with the way
with they have been, the whanau
who have been isolated in isolation, have had a lack
of genuine support until the Maori services arrived.
So the, the government funds, uh, many of those URA Maori,
uh, providers, uh, to provide a range of, uh,
services in the community, uh,
and ultimately, uh, works closely with,
has been working very through Health New Zealand,
working very closely with them, um, for the delivery
of those services in the community.
Uh, we continue to do so, uh,
and we know how important those partnerships are in order
to be able to, uh, keep, um, measles out of our communities.
And I'm very grateful for the partnerships that we have, uh,
with our whole Maori, uh, providers.
Um, and ultimately we, we, we need to continue
to work very closely in order to provide
that support in the community, uh, across New Zealand.
All supplementary. We've got some from Carlos, and yes, so
I just want thank you, chair.
I just want to, uh, follow up with, uh, Dr.
Ish, Campbell and Johanna question as well.
Um, because you mentioned that primary care,
it should play a very important role
to achieve those target.
So what step is the government taking
to strengthen the primary community care workforce?
Uh, point of order, It's following
them because, yeah, I mean,
Immunization, the, the question point of
Order, Vero,
Uh, it seems like it's just open mic night on healthcare
at the minute, and we're just doing every t uh,
every subject, uh, based on a, a comment
that the minister has has given.
Can we go back to having a structure around the awarding
of primaries so that we can all get a
Speaking to, given us, hold
on. Speaking to the point board. We
Order, basically, I just follow up
with HOA question about, about immunization,
and the minister h should respond by saying that
that primary care HP important view.
So no, he did, I think it's important
to follow up with their questions.
He did, but it still needs to be tied to the primary.
So HOA talking about immunization is tied to the primary,
which is around health targets.
So that was, that was online primary. The, the, and
Primary care is, primary care is one
of the, one of the target as well.
Primary, well immunization is,
which is what that was about.
But primary care, you have a primary coming up
and you can raise it and that if you wish,
but opening up another line of question around primary care,
not be in line with, with the, with the primary.
Um, so we will move to Jenny Markoff.
Thank you. So following on in terms
of the immunization targets, um, primary care, um,
particularly in, um, high deprivation areas, those, um,
practices that are delivering, um, childhood IMS
and other, um, immunizations across, across the board,
what extra support are those practices getting?
Because it's not just about phoning up
and saying, can you bring your child in, or whatever.
Actually, it's actually about sending someone out,
building trust, building, uh, that relationship,
particularly on the back of COVID
with the vaccine hesitancy, it is putting extra pressure.
So how's, what support is there for them to help,
um, go towards achieving
Target? I might ask,
um, Dr.
Nick Chamberlain if he wants to come
and speak to that question to talk in detail.
Uh, thank you and excellent question.
Um, so,
so primary care practices on the whole deliver in their
practices, but we, they link very closely
to outreach services,
both immunizing our Tamari Pacific Provider services, both
of which have been very successful, as well as, um,
health New Zealand outreach immunization services.
So we're, uh, families need a visit, uh,
or further encouragement that's,
that's, uh, what we're using.
And there's a significant amount
of resource goes into those outreach services.
Good. Thank you. Point of order, Mr. Chair.
Can we have our primary now?
Uh, HOA has a supplementary on that as well,
and then we'll, oh, no,
Don't, it's just a primary. It's a primary.
Well, no, we won't go to you yet
because you're, there's a lineup.
So Debbie is next, followed by Aisha, followed by Carlos,
I think followed, followed by Hua, followed by Ingrid.
Um, my question is, does the minister believe that Maori
and equities exist in the current health system?
If so, what data are you monitoring to address it
and will it be published?
Uh, well, the, the reality is, um,
that the life expectancy for Maori, uh, is
much lower than it is for non Maori.
Uh, there is a range of statistics which, uh, demonstrate,
uh, that,
and there's also a range of statistics, which, uh,
we measure in regards to our health targets
and health delivery, uh, to ensure
that we are ensuring e equal access, uh, for patients
to care, uh,
and also improving health outcomes for all, uh,
all New Zealanders, including Maori.
And so if you look at our health targets, for instance, uh,
one of the things that is done is we publish the
data at a national level.
Uh, we also publish the data, um, based upon, uh, a,
a range of ethnic, uh, breakdowns as well, including Maori,
uh, in order to provide that transparency around
the outcomes for both, uh, Maori, uh,
the population at large, uh, other,
other breakdowns as well.
And I think, and I think Health New Zealand's looking at
also shortly breaking that down
based on rurality versus urban as well.
We've just applied the rurality.
You've got three, um, indicator to a lot
of the health data this year,
and I think that's gonna provide another angle,
which we can look at the health target data.
Uh, to paraphrase, I think this,
the minister has said yes, uh,
that you acknowledge there are Maori
and equities in the health system.
Yes. And you are monitoring data to address this. Correct.
And that data will be publicly published or available. Yes.
And then my next follow up, um, is then what equity audits,
uh, binding accountability mechanisms, uh,
and remediation plans are currently in place.
Get, get that These are data sets that have been created.
There's some that actually already existed.
How are you ongoing addressing these inequities
so they're not accumulating
and getting worse under your watch?
Well, there's a range of initiatives underway to make sure
that we are focused on ensuring all New Zealanders have
access to the healthcare that they need.
Um, that data is critically important to ensure that Can
I, can I do a point of order?
Well, of course you can. You can ask point of order at any
Time. I get it. Um,
and get that everyone, all New Zealanders.
Is, is there some reason why we're not allowed
to say Maori inequities
or address Maori in? What's the point of
I Don't believe? Well, that's the point of
order. I,
my question is specifically dealing with Maori inequities,
and I, I'm not asking about all New Zealanders on the basis,
that is not a point that Maori Maori equities are very high
and they die seven years earlier than
just every other Zealand
Some water here. David, thank you. Yeah,
the first point I made, it's not
A point of order. The,
you can ask as a sub.
I mean, the first point I made, uh, is I acknowledged
that there is, uh, a significant, um,
difference in the age disparity of, uh,
or the expected life, ex life expectancy
of Maori versus the, the populations
And their experience in the health system.
I've not, I acknowledged that as, as part of the,
the first part of my answer.
Um, we need to improve access for all New Zealanders,
including Maori, uh,
and that's what we've got the target health targets in place
to do, to ensure that all New Zealanders,
including Maori, have that access.
Uh, there are too many New Zealanders waiting for care,
including too many Maori.
We have to make sure we're focused on reducing wait lists.
We have to reduce wait times.
We have to improve access in districts
and regions across New Zealand.
Uh, the data helps us to highlight where the gaps are
and where the effort is required in order to achieve, uh,
reductions in wait times, reduction in, in, in, in the, uh,
in, in the, in the wait lists and improving access to care.
Uh, and that is a real focus,
and that is why we've reestablished the health targets
to help focus the system on delivery for patients.
So to clarify, I'm sorry,
the audits are, um, you have a list.
Is that the formal way that the minister is
addressing equity?
And I guess my question was what equity audits
binding accountability mechanisms
and remediation plans are currently in place?
Well, there's a range of initiatives underway.
Uh, the holder Maori, um, appropriation is, is,
uh, in, is reported on in the annual report, uh, in terms
of the outcomes, a range of outcome measures for Maori.
But I, what I, what I've sought to, uh,
and that is a, that is a clear accountability mechanism.
What I've also sought to outline though, is that, uh, we,
we are replying, uh, a range of different lenses to,
uh, the targets
and to other data points in order to be able
to provide transparency
and accountability so that we can see where the gaps are
and where there is a need to, to address them.
Uh, you know, one of the examples has been the focus on the
immunizing, our tamari, uh, work program,
which was spoken about earlier by, uh, Dr.
Nick Chamberlain.
Uh, that's very much focused on
how do we address the gaps in immunization rights, uh,
in our Maori communities.
So there are clear focus areas that we have underway,
uh, to address those gaps.
Uh, but, and there's also clear focus on making sure
that the accountability mechanisms also are able
to provide transparent and accountable data so
that people are able to see where those gaps are.
My final sub on this primary please, is then
how does the minister explain, uh,
slashing Maori health providers by 750 million,
if the focus, which leaves them about 38 million, um,
if the focus is indeed on addressing Maori inequities?
Well, the government, um, was elected not to continue
with, uh, a, a co-governance health, uh, service,
Uh, with all respect.
I understand that, but that's not the question.
Well, I'm outlining the answer to your question.
We, we were elected not
to have a cog governed health service.
We're elected to have a singular health service
for all New Zealanders, uh,
which is focused on improving access for all New Zealanders
and addressing health based on need.
That is exactly what we are doing.
There is an appropriation for
and Maori services, uh, which is used to address, uh, many
of those needs, and there's a significant focus on that.
Uh, but as I said, we have, uh,
a focus on addressing health need in this country.
Uh, much of that need is amongst ha Maori populations.
And in the districts, which, uh,
we have higher Maori populations, that is where
that focuses on reducing wait lists, reducing wait times,
improving access to care, uh,
and working with ho Maori providers, uh, to be able
to close those gaps and, and increase access for
All with a much Budget patients being Maori
With a much reduced budget.
Dr. Bera primary, Why did the government allow Health
New Zealand to operate a $200 million centralized risk
reserve without a formal policy on how it is to be spent?
Uh, well, any organization, um, size
of health New Zealand, which has got, you know, a budget of
$30 billion, uh, significant budget, um, has to manage,
uh, its its budget, um, as it was when you were the Minister
of Health, um,
and has to ensure that it is
delivering, uh, within that budget.
Uh, contingencies are used by,
I'd say probably all government departments
and agencies to ensure that there is the ability
to manage risks, um, throughout the year, so that
as costs arise, they can though then, you know,
unknown costs or,
or things that may arise, that they can meet those
as the year progresses.
That's not an unusual thing for any board of,
whether it's a government department agency
or a business, uh, to be able to do.
I mean, I must point out
that's less than 1% of the entire budget.
Um, but ultimately it's about making sure that there is a,
uh, there is, there is good use of taxpayers money, uh,
and making sure that they manage those risks.
And that would be my expectation
as it was when you were the Minister of Health
Supplementary.
Uh, as you know, that's a budget larger than many
government agencies.
Uh, why doesn't it appear in the budget documents?
Uh, well, in terms of the annual,
the annual review talks about the, uh, the overall budget,
uh, and how that money is appropriated.
Um, health New Zealand will be here at the committee
tomorrow and will be happy to answer questions in relation
to how that, uh, how those, those particular, um,
uh, how the, how the money is utilized.
But ultimately, the annual report reports on what the, uh,
what was the budget and how it has been expended.
I'm happy to ask, um, Bevin McKenzie,
who's the Chief Financial Officer,
if he wishes to speak further
To that. Thank you. We'll have the
opportunity to do that later.
No, sir. Uh, can you please answer, um, in a request for,
um, official information request, uh, the response to me was
that there would be no further use
of the risk reserve in the next financial, uh, year
as in the current, um, the current
financial year that's currently underway. Is that correct?
Okay. And I don't have a copy of
that official Information Act request in front of me,
so I can't speak to that.
I'm happy to go and look it up. Well,
Mr, can you, sorry, I've got a s here.
I've still got one more sup. I've had point
Of order, Mr. Chair of
order. I'm trying to get to a point,
and you're not allowing my colleague to do
so. There's a clear line of
Question that is not a point of order,
but I, I, I get your concern that you're raising.
I'll got one more stop here and then I'll come over to Hay.
Can you assure the committee
that there will be no more use of undisclosed,
uh, unmonitored unreported on contingencies without a
policy at Health New Zealand?
My, well, my understanding is that they have a statement
of performance expectation, uh,
and my expectation is that they deliver against the
statement of performance expectation,
which has been tabled before Parliament.
Um, my understanding is that doesn't include, um,
any such contingencies.
Um, and so my expectation is they deliver against the,
the performance expectation that has been, uh,
tabled before Parliament.
Um, I don't have a copy of the particular OAA, um, which,
which you are, which you just
Million you don't know about.
I'm happy to come back to the, the member.
Um, with answers to that particular question.
Minister, we've heard in this committee previously
that Health New Zealand was controlling their finances using
a single Excel spreadsheet.
What moves have you taken to ensure
better financial control?
Irrelevant to a primary. That was pretty closely,
Which actually would answer point
Of water. Vero,
This is really off the point of a, a primary question
that was really about one single fund.
I have have further supplementaries about that fund.
The member is free to make his political
point later on in the session.
Is that his own primary speaking point,
Point of order, speaking to the point of order,
we're actually talking about, uh, the financial control?
No, no, we're talking about one fund.
That's what the entire line of questioning is about. It's
About risk reserves. It's
about this risk reserve.
This risk reserve, yeah. Hundred mil.
So if I may pick up on two further supplementaries, the, um,
the Health New Zealand has set efficiency targets
for different parts of the d the four different regions, uh,
in the coming financial year.
Are those efficiency targets being used
to create a risk reserve in the coming financial year?
Uh, I think if you, I think you're referring
to a written question in this instance.
Um, and if you read the risk written question,
I think it's very clear that those, those targets
that have been set up for, uh, the non staff,
uh, part of the budget, they're not required
to be achieved in order to meet the budget.
But if efficiencies are found, uh, there is an ability for
that money to be reinvested into frontline services, uh,
which is part of, you know, it gave an example in the, uh,
in the start, uh, in my, out in my questions at the start,
which is around, um, expenditure on consultants.
Um, you know, we're very clear
as a government when we were elected that we expect, um,
efficiencies in the back office.
We expect efficiencies when it comes
to expenditure on consultants.
Uh, we've seen a significant reduction in expenditure on
consultants in the last financial year,
and we expect the organization to continue
to find those efficiencies
and where they can find those efficiencies.
That gives the opportunity to free up cash to be able
to spend that on frontline services so
that more care can be delivered
for Kiwis, uh, sitting on wait list.
We wanna see as much money being freed up
to deliver on frontline services, uh, so
that patients are able to, to get access
to care in a timely and quality manner.
So in the south island, uh, 4.9% of,
uh, funding is the, uh, south,
the south island is asked being asked to make a 4.9%
efficiency, uh, target, which is 161 million point of
Order. Dr. Campbell,
uh, my step was ruled out
because it wasn't around a specific risk reserve.
Um, but that's a fair point, but
No, um, point to speaking to the point of order.
The minister has indicated in his comments
that this money is being held back for reinvestment.
So that is precisely the same.
No, I didn't say that. You, I, I said that the, uh,
the targets have been put in place,
but they're not required to be met in order to achieve, but
Budget, but what did you say? You,
you, you said that the money is
held for other investment. So can you, if the, if
Efficiencies, It's probably
the same as a primary payment. If
Efficiencies are achieved, um, that money can be freed up
to invest more in frontline services.
And an example of that I gave was less expenditure on
consultants means we can spend more money on
doctors supplementary.
I think most New Zealanders would like
to see more money spent on doctors
and less on consultants. Well, can,
That is the point we're Efficiencies.
And actually one of the great, uh, stats which, um, uh,
know the members glossed over,
but 750 more frontline staff at Health New Zealand in the
last 12 months, including a 5% increase in senior medical
offices, uh, in the last 12 months.
That's great news. More, more doctors on the frontline.
Uh, and, and actually, if we can free up more money from
and less money being spent on consultants,
that's more money we can put on doctors.
We've got a couple more subs here.
We've got a bunch of primary,
Oh, just point of order Chair, point
of order. Carlos, if
We make a decision on, on all this point of point
of orders is now, I mean,
if it's not appropriate, I think we should, you know,
I, I'm getting to move
to the next primary Ingrid Leary as a
Supplement. Thank you, minister.
Let's keep it focused on
what it was about, which was the risk
Reserve. Well, you talked about
efficiencies Minister,
which numbers are you using?
Because in the answer
to a written parliamentary question about staffing levels,
uh, you have said that for example,
Dunedin Hospital only needs eight, 8.4 nurses
that your own Health New Zealand document, the CCDM,
which is contracted with, uh,
health New Zealand point of order identifies that
Point of point of order.
Dr. Campbell, so are you the point of order
Different numbers?
Ingrid Leary, point of order.
Dr. Campbell, um, once again, um,
my was ruled out out of order.
I I'm gonna move on from this because we're moving away.
It was, I was happy
and I ruled Dr. Campbell out order, order.
I'm making a rule on, and we ruled Dr.
Campbell's out of order when he
started talking about a spreadsheet. Speak to,
You're the point of order.
I haven't had an opportunity Mr. Chair,
Speak to the point of order. Yeah.
My colleague was not able
to finish your line of questioning.
The minister talked about efficiencies for the frontline,
and yet what we are seeing is a different use of numbers
around safe staffing levels on the frontline.
My question is, where are those efficiencies coming from?
Okay. That meet that reserve.
And the minister has, uh,
provided answers in a written question
that is different from what has been contracted
by Health New Zealand.
I think that we deserve to hear an answer as
to why the understanding
of enough 16.75 versus I've heard enough 8.1
Heard. Thank you. I've heard enough.
Thank you.
I'm going to move on to the next one.
And the reason for that is 'cause your colleague,
it's very clear that this was about a single risk reserve
fund and we are now moving well away from that.
You do have a primary coming up.
Other people have primaries coming up as well. So thank you.
We have Carlos and hoa, then Ingrid, then Jenny. Thank
You, Mr. Chair.
Um, people in my electric or
or over in Auckland, one
of the major concern is about the surgical rates term.
What works have the government doing to reduce the surgery,
uh, surgical and, uh, the surgical wait time and diagnosis.
Wait time.
Uh, well thank, thank you for, for that question.
Um, as I said in the enlightening remarks, one of the key,
uh, focus areas has been around reducing weights
for elective treatments.
Planned care, uh, that has been a big focus, uh,
in the last financial year.
Uh, and in particular, um, has been our elective boost,
which has been around, uh, increasing the number of elective
surgeries undertaken hip hip operation, knee operations,
cataract operations, uh,
to make sure we're getting more patients being able
to see, be seen.
That's been both around improving, um,
the delivery within Health New Zealand,
but also partnering with private surgical hospitals, uh,
to deliver as much care for patients.
Uh, we set a target of 10,579 additional procedures,
uh, before the end of June.
Uh, and the system delivered over 16,000 additional
procedures, around 51% more than was
planned for the boost target.
That's obviously more people getting hip operations,
knee operations, cataract operations, uh, than would
otherwise have received them.
And of course, that is what is what has supported us leading
to the, the highest number of surgeries,
elective surgeries delivered in a particular quarter
over the last 10 years.
Uh, so that is, uh, that is a good,
that is good progress for patients.
Uh, and that is about making sure
that we are really focusing on reducing those wait lists.
As I said, there's still too many people waiting.
Those wait lists grew significantly under the,
over the previous six years when the target wasn't in place.
Uh, but we are starting to see progress,
but there's still a long way to go.
Supplementary, supplementary, Hamish. Excellent.
Thank you minister. One thing that I've heard around,
around the electorate is,
is the wait list is actually having the opportunity
to get on these wait lists,
and that is kind of getting access
to primary, primary healthcare.
What, what are you doing, um, to increase the access
that people can have to primary healthcare?
Well, the number one issue for New Zealanders being able
to get an appointment, and that means strengthen.
We need to strengthen our primary care workforce.
That is the most important thing, uh, that we can do.
Uh, and that's why we, uh,
released the primary care tactical action plan
and the number of key actions there, uh, to free up
and access in primary care, to increase the number
of doctors working in primary care, uh,
to upskill our nurses
to become nurse practitioners in primary care.
We're funding 120 places per year for the next four years
for nurses to train to become nurse
practitioners working in primary care.
Uh, of course we've increased the number
of adopted training places at our medical schools
by a hundred over the course of this government.
Uh, and we've agreed to the new yco medical schools.
So we're taking short term actions now, uh,
to improve the workforce and to increase the workforce.
Uh, we're also focused on those long-term changes
that are needed so that we have a long-term pipeline
of doctors and nurses working in primary care.
And so there's no one single answer,
but there's a number of things we've got underway
to improve access to primary care,
which is critically important to New Zealanders.
So what about, um, foreign trained doctors?
Well, that one, one of the initiatives is also working to,
there's a is to, we're funding a hundred places
for overseas trained doctors, uh, to be able to start their,
uh, career here in primary care.
Uh, and so we've funded a hundred places, uh,
for a hundred overseas trained doctors who
otherwise would not be able to get work, uh, in New Zealand,
uh, and would have to find work doing other things.
Actually, we want these, um,
overseas trained doctors working as doctors.
Um, and so we've already had a number
of those, uh, places filled.
A hundred of them will be filled over the, over the coming,
I think next 18 months.
Uh, so that work is already in progress.
Uh, there's more places getting filled as we speak, uh,
and that is about delivering more doctors
directly into primary care.
So there's more opportunities for people
to be seen quickly, uh, in our primary care.
Excellent. Is, um, are you looking at ways
that we can use technology
to also increase access to primary care?
Oh, absolutely. There's a lot of innovation underway in
primary care already.
Uh, huge amount of innovation.
Um, when you go and visit, um, doctor clinics up
and down the country, um, you see the role that, um, ai, um,
AI scribes is playing to free up, uh, the capacity
of our medical workforce, um, looking at
how they triage patients, how they, uh, work to, um,
make sure that the entire workforce is,
is working at the top of, top of scope.
Uh, so there's a significant amount of innovation, uh,
already underway in primary care,
delivering significant benefits, uh, to patients.
Uh, but we know that the number one issue is people,
it takes too long to get an appointment.
And so we have to continue to strengthen the workforce,
and that's why we've got these initiatives underway,
including the most,
the single biggest increase in capitation,
which was funded in budget 2025 as well.
Uh, sub supplement. What,
what role do you see Telehealth playing in
primary healthcare?
I think there's a range of opportunities.
Uh, we've, we've also invested in the, uh, 24 7, uh,
digital, uh, healthcare opportunity for New Zealanders.
If they can't get an appointment in a timely manner,
they can get, uh, an appointment online
with a doctor or a nurse practitioner.
Um, I believe there's around 40 to 45,000, um, um,
instances where patients have been able to access, um,
an appointment through that service.
Uh, and that's that's playing a critically important role
to, again, improve access
for New Zealanders to be able to get healthcare.
Uh, but I also know many, many doctor clinics up
and down the country are looking at, you know, since COVID.
Um, and that obviously changed the way that, um,
many people interacted with primary care.
There's a lot of innovation taking place around
how people access primary care.
Uh, patients are making different choices and,
and at a local level, doctor clinics, uh, are looking at
how they can continue to serve, uh, their patients, uh,
through providing innovation.
All right. We've got Supplementary,
Hold on. We've got
s from Jenny and Aisha
and hoa hoa.
You, you also have a primary next, so
Yes, I do. I'll take them all.
We're going to, Jenny, we've got
four minutes left to go right.
Thank, thank you. Can you, can you describe, um,
what impact the capitation uplift has had for practices
and, um, particularly for those, uh, more rural practices
and the impact in terms of, um, being able
to actually get in and see a doctor?
Well, I think the key thing has been, it's been a real,
um, focus on strengthening primary
care services up and down the country.
I think if you look at the SRO report,
which obviously looks at the, the long-term funding
of primary care over a long period of time, uh,
it's shown there's been significant underinvestment in
primary care, which has stretched the workforce, uh,
and limited its financial sustainability.
Uh, and so the significant uplift in primary care capitation
has been critical to, um, helping to provide
that additional funding, uh, to be able to
maintain those services, uh,
and to be able to strengthen those
services up and down the country.
And so when I go and talk to, um, primary care providers,
uh, they're incredibly grateful for the increased, uh,
focus on primary care that this government is providing.
Uh, the increased capitation funding is playing a critically
important role for them to be able to maintain
and strengthen their workforce.
And of course, with a strengthened, uh, workforce,
they're able to provide more care to patients, uh,
in their communities.
Uh, and so that is a critical lever.
Um, but ultimately that's
where the also the primary care tactical action plan
and all of those different workforce initiatives are also
critically important to make sure that we are growing
and training the primary care workforce, uh,
because that is the, the, the most important thing we can do
to be able to strengthen primary care so
that patients are able to have a more timely access, uh,
to appointments, uh, in their communities. And
What role does The, okay.
Hold on. Hold on, hold. We've got one up and one up.
We'll almost be on the mark then.
I should, I'll give you the last word.
So, so in terms of the PO primary health organizations,
um, and, uh, su the support that they provide for practices
around the country, um, are there any changes, uh,
that you think need to be made in that area to, for them
to provide greater support, um, for, for practice
to enable them to, to deliver more? Yeah,
I mean, they have a critically important role
to support the practices which they have as part
of their, their organization.
Um, ultimately one of the key, uh, changes
that cabinet has agreed
to is the re-weighting of capitation.
Uh, that is gonna play a really important role to make sure
that we are focused on, again, further strengthening
how capitation funds primary care, particularly, uh, in,
in rural communities, uh, which, um,
that will play a really important role in
supporting those clinics.
Uh, will also play a critically important role in terms of,
uh, taking into account things such as multi morbidities,
socio socioeconomic, um, factors in relation
to the populations that clinics serve.
Uh, and so that will be, um, that will be part of the,
the upcoming PSAP negotiations, uh,
which will take place in the first half of next year
around the re-weighting of capitation, uh,
to make sure those funds are being used to be able
to even further strengthen primary care,
particularly in our rural communities,
which will benefit significantly from that re-weighting.
Okay. We've got one more set. One more time.
That's all we've got there. I'll give it to Dr. Ro.
Thank you Chair. You accept your telehealth settings have
undermined continuity of care for primary care?
No, I think it provides another option.
I mean, we've had around 40 to 45,000 patients have used the
service every single day.
Over 50,000 patients go to their own gp.
Uh, and so in the last four
and a half months since that service has been available,
around 40 to 45,000 patients have used it.
It's provided additional care, it's
provided access to those patients.
Uh, but there's no way, I think, uh,
undermined the important
and critical role that GPS play in terms
of providing continuity of care.
And I think the numbers speak for themselves.
Over 50,000 patients access care through their primary care
provider every single day.
The numbers we're speaking about here, uh, uh, are very, uh,
a very small comparison, uh, to what is
provided for by primary care providers.
Uh, but it has, for those patients who have used it, uh,
provided additional access, uh, which they
otherwise, uh, may not have been able
to get in the time that they would've liked.
Thank you everyone.
Minister, director, general Health New Zealand.
Thank you, everyone in attendance. Thank you.
Appreciate your time. And committee members,
thank you for joining us Director General.
Thank you, uh, colleagues from the ministry.
We have you here for two hours.
I will open it up to you for some opening comments,
and then we will go to members for their questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
Of the committee.
Um, it's, uh, my privilege as the director general of health
to be here for this annual review hearing.
Um, before I start, um, I just want
to acknowledge the dedicated
and hardworking health workforce across New Zealand
who work tirelessly to improve, uh, health outcomes
for all New Zealanders.
Uh, today I'd like to share the progress the Ministry
of Health has made towards, uh, a more effective,
sustainable, and responsive health system that delivers
for patients, uh, no matter where they live in New Zealand,
the Ministry of Health is the lead advisor
to the government on health
and has three core roles, policy,
regulation, and monitoring.
Over the past year, we've had a strong focus on driving the
health system to deliver removing beyond planning to action,
implementing strategy,
and delivering policy, strengthening accountability.
Through our monitoring
and driving measurable improvements across the system,
I'm pleased to be able to report New Zealand's health system
is delivering better outcomes.
This is all the more notable against a backdrop
of global challenges, such as aging populations.
New Zealand's population is living longer than ever
before with life expectancy at birth,
sitting at nearly 83 years,
while overall life expectancy has risen.
Health life expectancy has improved,
but has not kept pace,
meaning more years are also spent in, or health.
Mm-hmm. The last, uh,
the latest quarterly reporting against health targets show
progress in areas such as faster cancer treatment,
childhood immunizations,
shorter stays in emergency departments,
reductions in elective surgery wait lists with initiative,
slightly elective boosts driving an increase in the number
of procedures carried out.
The government is investing in a number
of new training pathways to strengthen and grow the GP
and primary care nursing workforces.
Uh, the new medical school at the University
of Waikato will provide an extra 120 medical training places
a year from 2028.
This is in addition to the a hundred extra medical training
places added over the past two years.
These efforts combined with investment
and innovation, digital health
and urgent care services signal a shift towards models
of care that keep people well in their communities
and reduce the need for hospital level care.
They deliver be better health outcomes
for New Zealanders now,
while also building the foundations for the future.
A particular focus for the ministry this year has been
working towards simplifying aspects of the health system.
Our policy advice has supported more effective healthcare
delivery and has helped to give effect
to the government's policy statement on health.
Recent work includes amendments to the Medicines Act,
which help New Zealanders access medicines more easily
and enable more modern models of care.
Additionally, re regulatory changes have supported greater
prescribing rights for many health professionals, such
as podiatrist prescribers This year.
Meds Safe has cut medicine evaluation times across the board
on top of the substantial reductions already made
in the previous year.
Faster access means patients get life changing
treatments sooner.
Better health outcomes depend not on any on frontline
effort, but on a health system.
With sound governance
and decision making, this has been a priority
for the Ministry of Health as we've worked
with the government to stabilize the governance
of Health New Zealand and restore confidence in it.
Midway through last year, it was clear the structural reform
of 2022 had not delivered the improved performance
intended health.
New Zealand faced deficit succeeding a billion dollars
with flat productivity in rising demand driven
by an aging population.
The government replaced the Health New Zealand board
with a commissioner in July, 2024.
This was followed eight months later with the establishment
of the Health Assurance Unit.
These steps brought a measure of stability,
allowing the government to reinstate the Health New Zealand
Board in July this year.
Additional measures include a new infrastructure committee
to oversee delivery of critical health infrastructure
projects and an independent crown observer to work
with Health New Zealand to oversee delivery against health
targets and strategic priorities.
As part of our role, as monitor of the health System,
the Ministry Commission to Deloitte,
to undertake an independent review
of health New Zealand's financial performance for 2324,
the Deloitte Review found
that Health New Zealand experienced a significant decline in
financial performance and cash position during this time.
In response to these findings, the government Ministry
of Health and Health New Zealand have strengthened local
governments, introduced quarterly monitoring
that focuses on key deliverables
and invested in modern financial systems,
including a single platform
for real time data and decision making.
These improvements will require sustained commitment
and collaboration, but steps in our underway
that are critical to regaining control, rebuilding trust,
and delivering better outcomes for all.
New Zealanders through stronger policy advice,
effective regulatory oversight,
and consistent system monitoring, the Ministry
of Health remains focused on driving measurable improvements
and ensuring every dollar spent translates into better
services and better care for New Zealanders
today and in the future.
So I mentioned in my opening, none
of this will be possible without the expertise, skill,
and dedication of many health
professionals across the country.
I also want to acknowledge the commitment
of my team at Ministry
of Health who've worked extremely hard over the last year
to support a health system that delivers for everyone.
Thank you for the opportunity, provides me opening comments,
and, um, I welcome your questions.
Thank you very much for your introduction there.
Uh, we have a fairly question from Dr. Vel.
Thanks, director General,
can you please give the committee some specificity on
how the ministry forms its monitoring role?
How do you decide what you are focused on?
Um, to what level do you measure what's
happening at Health New Zealand?
Uh, we need to understand this so that, uh, we have a
a sense of what's reasonable to hold you to account for.
Clearly there'll be some level
of granularity that is beyond that role.
So just really want to understand the scope of that role
and how you're carrying it out.
Okay, thank you. Um, yes, uh, uh,
health New Zealand is New Zealand's largest organization.
Uh, and of, uh, the maturity
of the monitoring is also, uh, important to align that
with the maturity of the organization.
So we have a number of different steps to our, um,
monitoring system,
and we have a kind of graduated approach, uh,
and we can, uh, talk a little bit more about those, uh,
levels in a minute.
But I guess I would say in the opening, you know,
we have all the formal arrangements that you have
for Uni Crown Entity, where we, uh, look at their, uh, SPE,
their annual reporting.
We monitor their appropriations, uh,
and so we have those formal mechanisms.
Uh, and we also have, uh, um, uh, regular things
that you'd expect to find in a number of, um,
monitoring departments.
Like we, uh, request
and receive copies of their board agendas.
Uh, and, um,
and, uh, at the moment we also have a Crown observer,
which enables us to, uh, which enables the government
and us to have, uh, support for that monitoring role.
I'll ask Brent, who's the head of our monitoring, to talk
through more of the undergraduate frame.
Oh, thank you. Director General.
Uh, just in addition, uh, to the standardized, uh,
regular, uh, monthly
and quarterly, uh, reporting that we'd do.
Uh, obviously we're supporting, uh, the minister
to ensure accountability documents and things are met.
I think, uh, to the members' question,
if you're talking about the content and
how we decide the level at which, uh, we pitch, uh,
our monitoring activity,
that will vary depending on the content area.
For example, if we're looking at the infrastructure program,
uh, of Health New Zealand have a lot of sips.
Uh, we look at that at a whole of program level.
The Health New Zealand board is responsible
for the individual programs, uh,
and projects within their overarching program.
But the Ministry of Health receives on a monthly basis a
capital, uh, report that indicates, uh,
progress against the agreed program, particularly
with a focus on things in that instance, uh,
over $5 million.
We are similarly in the process at the moment, working
with the Health New Zealand exec
and board to develop, uh, an equivalent frame, uh,
for monitoring of the digital investment, uh,
that the board oversees, um,
and would expect to see that picked up, uh, in our regular,
uh, monitoring reporting to, uh, ministers as a line item,
one of the things, uh, we've been focused on progressing,
uh, looking back at the year in review was obviously a focus
on the financial monitoring, given some of the history, uh,
of health Nzs.
And we've developed and had underway since July.
Um, a new financial
and non-financial, uh, monitoring report that picks up,
obviously, the financial performance of Health New Zealand,
but matters covered in the GPS
and the health delivery plan alongside the
minister's identified priorities.
Thank you. Just want to really expand
to understand this better.
Uh, so can you describe the types of, um,
activities you might undertake in the monitoring role in
relation to an example, like the infrastructure plan?
Are you providing, um, uh, advice
to the minister on the balance
of priorities being achieved in Health New Zealand,
or are you analyzing that in, in some way?
Um, how, how do you do it?
Uh, it'll be, uh, a bit dependent on
where we are in the investment lifecycle.
So yes, overall we provide advice
to the minister on investment priorities.
Um, and that would happen prior to the monitoring phase,
if you like, before it gets into an agreed plan.
With respect to, uh, the capital program particularly, uh,
the ministry does have a role to, uh, review
and provide second opinion advice on business case material.
In some instances, that's focused primarily at, uh, the,
the more significant, uh, end of the spectrum,
and that's significance with respect to risk and or cost.
Um, more generally, what we'd be looking for as part
of our monitoring role is, uh, the assurance mechanism
that the Health New Zealand board itself, uh,
and the information it's receiving, uh, to satisfy itself,
that that program is on track
and achieving value for money and those sorts of things.
Um, this is a headline generating question.
This is a, um, can you describe what you're doing? Question?
Tell me how you look for risks
and, um, uh,
act on those to prevent them being coming to pass.
Yeah, sure. So we would use a variety of sources
of information, obviously, uh, draw on stakeholder feedback
and, and any information that's provided to the ministry.
We have the formalized monitoring, uh, report information
that's provided to us in this instance from,
from health NZ on its monthly capital plan.
We have direct engagement with both the executive, uh,
and the Health New Zealand board over that content.
And we're also interacting, uh, regularly
with the ministerial, uh, infrastructure committee, uh,
to ensure that the quality of information
that we have access to enables us to assess, uh,
risk from the point of view of, uh, is scope,
uh, appropriate.
Has that taken account of, for example, clinical input prior
to, uh, scope being finalized.
Um, and that's, uh, an activity we would,
we'd in the first instance be utilizing information levers
requesting that from, from Health New Zealand, uh,
monitoring, uh, approach more broadly, uh,
we have a four stage, uh, monitoring approach, which kind of
moves from routine monitoring
and the type of activity that I'm, I'm describing here
through to a point of escalation where we might, um,
or enhance monitoring where we might, um,
take a deeper dive, look at a particular project.
And that would be as a result of, uh,
either concerns we've identified ourselves
or we require, uh, more, uh, intense
or detailed information right through to if we had, um,
more significant or serious concerns.
Uh, I guess the, the highest level, uh,
level we've got available as,
as recommendations for intervention.
And, um, that's, that's very, very rarely drawn upon
The, um, industry is much smaller than Health New Zealand.
Uh, can you give me a sense of
how much the monitoring function is resourced within the
Ministry of Health in terms of, uh, people and, um, budget?
Uh, so, and help me understand, um,
how you set your priorities of what's being monitored.
Uh, so in terms of the, uh, resourcing
of the monitoring group, so the monitoring function,
um, spans the ministry.
I can speak to the performance
and governance group, uh, which has the lead responsibility.
Uh, there's approximately 50
or just over 50 FTE, um, in that area.
And we have access to discretionary money should
that be required to support the monitoring activity as well.
Um, in terms of how we identify, uh, our priorities, um,
we've had, uh, in the year in review a focus firstly on the
financial performance, um, of health and,
and making sure that that was under control.
And we've certainly observed, uh,
improvement in the financial management, uh, practices, um,
and results being borne out there.
With respect to the remainder of, uh, monitoring activity.
We'd obviously draw on, uh,
the priorities identified in the government policy
statement, as well as having a look at, uh, the likes
of the Health and independence report
for health outcome indicators, where we might want to, uh,
take a, a more system performance look, if you like.
One of the things, uh,
I'm particularly focused on having in place, um,
before the end of this financial year, is an agreed set
of monitoring plans for all entities, um,
and actually clarified, um, information about
what activity we're going
to undertake more broadly in the system, uh, monitoring
aspects, and in particular how that interacts
with the other entities in the system
that similarly have monitoring responsibilities
Suck on. That gotta
suck with Ingrid.
Um, just, just, um, following on from
that, can you give us a list of entities that you're looking
to make a formal, formal arrangement with?
Uh, certainly we would have, uh,
health New Zealand is the top of, uh, the list,
and it will be prioritized first, uh, will
otherwise be the entities that the Ministry of Health has,
um, entered entity monitoring responsibilities for.
Um, happy to send through our list.
So, And then,
Um, the ministry's own report
says it's not reported on mental health targets.
We're seeing all sorts of numbers being bandied
around this place around, um, whether targets are being met
or not, particularly in relation
to specialist wait times and youth access.
Why are you not monitoring those?
And you've mentioned conversations
to happen later this year.
Is this something that is on the record?
Uh, yes. So we, the minister has moved to set some targets
for mental health, so it would now be our role to, I mean,
uh, to monitor those and, um, and report on them.
Why have you not done that, um, till now?
Uh, well, in terms of the targets, mm.
Um, so we, I mean, we, we collect a range
of data on mental health, um,
but now that the targets have been set,
that would be something we'd be looking to monitor
and, um, make part
of our monitoring plan with Health New Zealand.
Okay. And I guess thank you for the answer.
My point is that the targets were set some time ago, um,
and taxpayers
and others need to know the veracity
of the claims being made around them,
and yet, um, I can't find out from the Health Quality Safety
Group or the ministry
who is actually monitoring those
targets. Where should I be looking?
Um, well, we are the Monitor of Health New Zealand,
and so we will absolutely be looking
to monitor their performance against those targets.
But you don't that data yet.
I just want to be clear. You don't have, do we,
Carrie, do we, can you just,
Yeah, can you maybe just outline
what we do collect and how
Happy to, um, yeah.
So when the Minister for Mental Health set the targets,
it was the first target set for mental health.
So for the past year, we have been working very closely
with HealthEd to embed an infrastructure to support that,
uh, for the excess targets,
particularly the specialist service one.
Uh, that has been a longstanding quality metric in the
mental health system, and it's supported
by things like the KPI program, which is a sector led
and owned quality improvement program.
The data is collected in the national data collection
for mental health, uh, called primed.
So the ministry has access to that dataset, as does health
and Zed and providers.
So for the ministry's monitoring role, uh, what we do is we
provide a validation
and assurance lens on Health New Zealand's reporting against
the target, uh, to make sure
that the data is complete and accurate.
So we, uh, do some checks around that.
Uh, we also dig into variation of the targets every quarter,
and that includes by age.
And so we know under 20 fives often have longer wait times
for specialist services.
So that's a key focus for us in understanding the drivers of
that, uh, and making sure Health New Zealand is
intervening in meaningful ways, uh,
to lift performance. Just
A supplementary to Hamish Ask my understanding, that's,
I'll come back to you. I was gonna
go to him before, but you keep going.
So we've got Hamish and I've also got Cameron. Thank you.
And I've got you.
Um, excellent.
So, so you,
and I'm, I'm just a little bit confused with the line,
the line of questioning you are collecting data on mental
health status and what is being provided?
Yes. Okay, excellent. Thank you.
But you're not reporting it, you are, oh,
you have oversight of what Health New Zealand is reporting?
Is that my understanding of, of
who is accountable for this data outside of the minister?
Yes. So Health New Zealand publicly reports on the mental
health targets in the same way
as they do the health targets.
Uh, and we report to the Minister for Mental Health
with our advice on that.
And you looked to report on
this in the future, given that,
Come on, come through the chair. Yes,
Question. Thank
You. Okay. We've got,
did you,
did you have a primary under you're up?
No, that's fine. I think
Does, I'll put you back on the list.
Asha, I've got Cam for primary.
You got me for primary. I do. Who,
Who collects targets for cancer, uh, in New Zealand, who,
who, who collects the, um,
information about reaching cancer
reduction targets in New Zealand?
So the information itself would be collected by, in terms
of current performance, would be
collected by Health New Zealand.
The cancer control agency reports on, uh, uh, some
of that data, and some of it's in its annual report in terms
of how New Zealand is doing on, so
What, why, so, uh, ministry
of Health oversees the Cancer Control Agency.
No, we don't. Okay. So what is the purpose
of the Cancer Control Agency?
Uh, so the Cancer Control Agency is a departmental agency
within, uh, uh, within the, um,
so we provide shared services and back office for it.
It is accountable in the same way
that a normal government department is accountable.
Yeah. Okay. And do you think
that the health just final su,
do you think the health system would be, um, served better
by having, um, models such as the Cancer control agency
for other issues such as autoimmune immune disease,
or do you think that the role
of the cancer control agency is duplicative
and it could actually be served in
other entities and health system?
I think when you are talking about machinery of government
and institutions, uh, you, uh, there are lots
of different judgements that go into making those, uh,
decisions about how the sector should look.
Um, I think, uh, as you will know,
the public service commissioner has talked about the fact
that the New Zealand system as a whole appears to have a lot
of agencies for a country of five and a half million people.
Um, but it's always, it's a judgment call about
how much specialist expertise you want versus
general expertise.
Uh, and then about the start, how far away
or close to government decision making you
want an agency to be.
And so, uh, there's a range of factors
that will go into a machinery of government recommendations.
So I'm not sure completely.
I understand whether you think it should or should,
but I, well, well answered, I suppose.
Leave it there. Have you got a primary? Yes. Yeah.
You all right. Excellent. Brilliant.
Um, and, uh, probably gonna take this, um, this, uh,
review probably in a slightly different tact.
Um, something that the Ministry of Health has come in
and spoken a lot to this committee about is about vaping.
Um, of course, the enforcement, um,
of vaping regulations does sit with the Ministry of Health.
And of course, there has been an increase in penalties
and, uh, uh, for, uh, vape sales to, to,
to, to minors.
Uh, we have heard previously that the ministry was looking
to increase the number of enforcement officers.
Can we have an update on, um, the in increase enforcement
of, um, vape sales in New Zealand?
Andrew, Uh, thank you for the question.
Uh, so yes, so increased, uh, enforcement
and regulation around vaping has been a key focus, uh,
over the year in question.
Um, the specific question about the increased the number
of smoke-free enforcement officers.
Um, so I think we have previously presented the committee on
that, uh, those roles are employed by Health New Zealand.
Uh, my understanding is they are now all, uh,
fully employed, uh,
and also, uh, that we have seen in the year to September,
uh, a twofold increase in the amount of enforcement
activity, um, with a particular increase,
actually just in the last, um, few months
after the changes, the regulations that came in
around visibility, uh, and the banning of disposables.
So, uh, the increase in, uh, fines, um, and, uh,
and related, uh, penalties, uh, has, uh,
has also played a role in terms of actually having a, um,
a greater capacity to, uh, to enforce, enforce those.
So, yes.
Mm-hmm. Um, so it was twofold enforcement.
Is that, is that across vaping regulations?
And you mentioned the visibility.
Uh, what about actually enforcement of youth, uh,
penalties for youth vaping?
Uh, when you say penalties for youth vaping,
do you mean, uh, sale of
Sales to minor, I suppose is Yes.
So that's, so that's included, uh, within that data.
So most of that enforcement is done through the use of, uh,
what are call controlled purchase operations, sort
of the sting operations where, um, uh,
with appropriate legal protection, uh, miners are sent
to try and, um, uh, to try
and purchase, uh, pleasingly, uh, compliance is,
is pretty good.
Um, you know, sort of about 90%, uh, of those, um, of those,
uh, operations, uh,
retailers are doing everything that they're supposed to be doing.
But of course, there is a, there are a proportion
that aren't, uh,
and there's been an increase, uh,
in enforcement action taken as a result.
Definitely. Can you, sorry, ve as a, as a supplementary
Yes, Yes. Um,
uh, can you comment on the, uh, coverage
and effectiveness of the, uh,
product testing regime for vapes?
Hmm. So the current settings
for vaping regulation in new is, is, uh, based on,
uh, notification.
So when, uh, so we are, uh, the Ministry
of Health is required to be notified, uh, of the, uh,
of products as they're brought to market,
so that we have a register of those.
But it is a system where, uh,
the onus is on the manufacturer of the importer to state
what those, uh, what they are.
We, oh, ma, point of order, um, point of order. Dr.
Per, could I revise my question just to be more specific?
This is the actual testing of the contents of the vapes
as done by ESR.
Um, can you describe when that's done
and how representative that is
of the amount of vapes out there?
Yes, thank you. So, um, so we, so the, so the regime is,
as I said, is a notified regime,
and then part of the regulatory role of ministry is to, uh,
is to commission, uh, uh, the Institute for Public Health
and Forensic Science, formerly known as ESR, to test, uh,
a either a random sample
or a targeted sample, depending on
where we might see signals.
Um, so we are increasing, uh, significantly the number of,
uh, vapes, uh, that we, uh,
that we are commissioning to test.
It's about a 60% increase over the previous year.
Um, but that will mean that we are testing approximately,
uh, 400, uh, different products, uh, over the next year.
That's the sort of the, sort of the order of things.
Have you found anything that's concerned you so far?
Uh, so we did find in a recent round of testing, we found,
uh, particularly as it relates to nicotine content,
that's been one of the, the main, uh,
issues that we look for.
Uh, where that, is that too low or too high?
Uh, both, uh, so interestingly, the, a, a,
a reasonable proportion of, uh, vapes, uh, were not, uh,
we're not saying what was on the tin effectively.
Uh, thankfully, uh, more were low than high, uh,
but there were some that were, some were too high,
and those were, um, we took, uh, immediate action with, uh,
importers to get those removed from sale.
Hold on, hold on, hold on. We've got her first
Supplement. K
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A supplementary on this issue to do with vapes.
Um, and going back to the, the location
and the shops, you know that in the community, um,
can we confirm, um,
how many enforcement officers we have across the
country, uh, right now?
Have we increased our numbers of enforcement offices?
So I can absolutely confirm we have increased our number
of enforcement officers, uh, as I said
that they are employed by Health New Zealand,
so I would need to get the exact
numbers from Health New Zealand.
So, uh, we can either provide that
or you can ask them, uh, when they appear.
And just to parte around the enforcement officers
and their controlled purchase operations,
does the ministry monitor, uh, the, uh,
enforcement space in terms
of whether there's live prosecutions
or warnings being issued?
What are we seeing in terms of trends?
Yes. So we do, uh, so we do a quarterly, uh,
enforcement compliance report that we produce in partnership
with the National Public Health Service within Health
New Zealand to employ the smoke-free enforcement officers.
Uh, and we have seen a significant increase in, uh,
compliance activity over that period.
Okay. Jenny, just
To stop on that, when you said that, um,
some vapes were lower nicotine levels
and concerning high, what was the,
can you just give us the specificity of those?
Um, I don't, I don't have the specificity with me today,
but we're happy to provide it. It
Was a bit higher, or was it concerningly?
It was, it was a little bit higher.
It wasn't sort of orders of magnitude higher.
Okay. Okay.
Um, uh,
next primary is veal.
Thank you. The last time we had Ministry
of Health Act committee, we had a conversation about an, a
review, a new framework for, um,
the ministry's regulatory function.
Um, there was a slightly frustrating conversation,
and I left it not really understanding what you had done.
Uh, could you please describe how the ministry is seeking
to improve its regulatory function
and what practical things are being done?
Thank you. Um, uh, uh,
so, uh, obviously I wasn't here for that, uh,
conversation. Yep. We can
Start again.
Uh, but, um, I think, uh, there's a couple
of things I'll just open up with
and then, uh, Jenny might be able to get who's, uh, acting,
uh, head of regulatory services.
Sorry, my apologies. I just realized I didn't introduce, uh,
Brent or Kerry as, um, uh, uh,
but I'm sure, uh, you know them more if not.
Um, I will with our next come up, um, uh,
who's a acting kind of, uh, regulatory services, I think,
um, there's a couple of different things for regulatory, um,
uh, that, uh, we need to, um, think about.
So first of all is, uh, the actual legislation that, uh,
governs some of those functions, some of that legislation,
um, is old and needs regularly updating.
And, um, I thank the committee for their work on the, um,
uh, on legislation as it comes through.
Uh, and, uh,
and we have done a lot
of work this shift on our regulatory performance,
in particular, our speed of service delivery.
Uh, and I'm very pleased in some
of the improvements we've had for things like Medisafe, um,
and, um, uh, approving of medicines.
So Jenny, perhaps if you could talk through a little bit how
that's going and, um, how we got there.
Uh, yes. Thanks Audrey.
Um, just in terms of, uh, your question on the frameworks,
just to go back to that, um,
we have also published our regulatory, uh,
strategy stewardship strategy.
So we've been looking through all of our regulatory regimes
and looking at how they monitor risk, looking at
how they do on performance, uh, and going through that.
So we have, um, that now in place.
Uh, and I think it's given us, you know,
some really good insights around
how our regime is measuring risk
and some of our performance stats.
A lot of stuff. I guess to go to Audrey's point, uh,
we are looking at our performance, uh,
and we are seeing some really good, I think, increases
in some of our measures.
So, for example, around medicines applications, uh,
we've seen some quite big decreases in our approval times.
Um, is there any specific questions you wanted to
Cover? So many.
So the, uh, when you
identify, um, processes that are, um,
uh, or regulations that might be out of date or inefficient
or, um, fail to mitigate an important risk,
how do you, um, have you identified any
of tho those, and what do you do?
Uh, yes. I mean, in terms of the outdated legislation, um,
we, we are in a process of identifying, uh,
legislation that's out of date.
Uh, so yes, we are putting together a list on that.
Um, we, we have list,
Say Good question.
Um, it is currently, uh, something that we are working on,
so we haven't put together the full list yet.
What, what do you think of the Health Act 1952,
Uh, in terms of should we hand that
Through? Let's, let's have, um,
policy
and I think, um, yeah, I think, um, some of these, some,
as I said in the, um, my initial answer, I think, uh,
this is Ruth Isaac, uh, policy and strategy.
Uh, we have, um, we do have outdated legislation.
Uh, so I don't have the answer
to the Health Act 1952 question.
Um, there's a huge range of legislation obviously, that, um,
the health system is governed by.
And, uh, one of the oldest is the Medicines Act,
which has just been, uh, uh, improved.
And obviously we are continuing
to work on the medical products bill, which is a replacement
for that act and modernization of that whole regime.
Um, we have been, uh, we're starting
to look in the ministry as part of the work around
that regulatory strategy, um, at whether
we might be able to do regulatory systems bills in future
to address minor matters across the suite of legislation
that, uh, can't wait for a full policy reform program.
We haven't finalized, um, our thinking about how
that would work, but given the complexity
and quantity of legislation that we have, that may be a path
that we think is worth going down.
Right. I've got more,
And, and the appreciate the line
of questioning is looking kind of currently what's,
what's outdated, what work is going on
to look at future proofing, um, our healthcare system,
thinking not only changing demographics,
but also changing technologies, which actually might drive,
um, the outdated this of, of some of our legislation.
Um, and we did have far back in here yesterday. Mm-hmm.
Um, and, uh, one of the things
that was brought up was something like car Tcell where
that's going to fit into our healthcare system from funding
wise and regulatory point of view.
Yeah, I think, um, we're starting to see more
and more technologies that, um, uh,
well, not only that our great, um,
be grateful patients if they deliver, um, on the promises
that, that certainly they're looking like.
We're also seeing, uh, mergers of technologies,
which I think is going to require us to look at legislation
and regulation.
So the merger of, um, medical products is a good example
where you have a merger potentially of a medicine
and a physical thing, um, into, uh, one item.
And so we do need to, um, make sure that those regulatory
and uh, uh, frameworks work for,
uh, new technology.
Uh, same with, you know, we're seeing increasing uses of,
at the moment, AI scribes in particular, they appear
to be very good at removing the admin,
uh, out of the system.
But, uh, we know that in kind of looking ahead,
there's a lot of technologies that might be able to help
with things like diagnostics
or that might be able to help with recommendations, um, uh,
treatment and stuff like that.
And we will need to think about what's the regulatory
framework for some of those, um, to ensure that we continue
to manage the quality of the healthcare system. Dr.
Vero, um, can we talk specifically about how
you identify, uh, clinical
or safety risks that, um,
are related to, uh,
regulation IE either inadequate regulation, um,
or, um, uh, failure to regulate a,
an, an emerging health threat?
Okay. Um, uh, so the number
of, uh, ways we do that.
So one, um, uh, we obviously we're in close, uh, point
with Health New Zealand in terms of the work, uh, in terms
of the things that they're seeing.
Uh, we also work with the Health
and Disability Commission,
health Quality and Safety Commission.
So anything that they would be coming up with, uh, uh, look,
they make, make recommendations, and we look at all of those
and see if there's anything that, uh, in those
that might be, uh, of, uh, regulatory interest.
Um, there are also other bodies such
as the National Clinical Governance Group
and then, uh,
newly established clinical Senate in Health New Zealand,
where again, we'd be looking, uh, for feedback
and input into from them about what, um,
risks they're seeing
and what things they're concerned about from either a,
you know, quality delivery perspective
and our monitoring role, but also from a regulatory
perspective and whether there's things that we need to,
Um, yes.
Well, part of the challenge in this committee is
that we hear a lot about the con, uh, connections
between different parts of the health system
and yet, uh, also instances where they fall down
and we think about surgical mesh as an example, where the,
um, safety signals were not responded
to in an appropriate, timely way.
Uh, is there someone who, this is their job looking out
for people, risks of people being harmed, uh, across
the set of, um, uh, products
and other things that you are responsible for regulating?
Um, so I wouldn't say there's one individual.
Um, I would say there's a range of individuals.
So we have, um, for example, statutory role holders
for things like, um, mental health, um, Dr.
John who's the, um, director of mental health.
So we have, um, those kind of roles.
We have the, we have Med Safe,
which obviously is very important, looking at the safety
of medicines that, um, are, uh, wanting
to be sold in New Zealand.
Um, and, uh, and we have, um,
and obviously we've governing legislation, regulations
to ensure that that new products brought in, uh,
looked at and assessed.
I guessing your questions more about
where the things are going wrong
and how they get to us, um, things
We don't know yet. Yeah. Yeah.
And I think, um, uh, as said
before, there's kind of this, this, the health quality
and safety health disability commissioner,
and obviously anybody can contact us at any time.
So there is that kind of generalized, um, a
Availability.
But, and, and I think, um, you know,
there isn't one solution.
We have a multi-layered system so that those things can come
through multiple angles, like end jurisdiction obviously.
But for, you know, for example,
when something does become an issue like surgical mesh,
we have a clinical quality and safety group that,
and our chief medical officer who will lean in with others
as appropriate across the, um, agencies and the,
and the clinical professions to, to,
to delve into the issue and review it.
Yeah. My final supplementary question, just going back
to the, sorry, I didn't, uh, catch the name
of the person on your left director general, uh,
the comment about, uh, performance of regulatory functions,
I assume your monitoring time to go back to applicants
for various, uh, regulatory, uh, applications they have
to make under regulations. Is that correct?
Uh, yes, absolutely.
And we, uh, and performance is,
and the performance of our regulatory function is very
much a priority.
We have a number of measures in place already as part
of our regular reporting where we do look at, um, the time
that we take to assess applications.
So that covers, um, you know, approvals for medicines,
it covers eligibility for assisted dying.
Uh, and I can, we can get you a few more
of those measures if, if it's helpful.
Thank you. We are also interested, obviously,
in measuring, uh, regulatory effectiveness
and risk of regulatory failure.
And I think that's somewhere which, uh,
we acknowledge we need to do further work around
how we develop a suite of, of, of indicators
that would help us to measure that
more effectively over time. Sure. Um,
Thank you. That is
exactly what I wanted to understand.
Um, kid,
you are clearly far more knowledgeable on that than us.
Can you please explain what that might mean?
And the reason why we're pursuing these questions is there
are proposals brought to us by petitioners
for patient safety commissioners and, and things like that.
So just like to understand what,
how the system could be improved.
Um, so I, I would like to give you a,
a more fulsome answer, um, after the committee around that.
We have looked at some of those questions from petitioners
and things, and I guess there are lots of different ways
that people can make complaints
or can bring things to light.
We are not convinced that you need another way for people
to, um, bring patient safety matters.
I'm aware of the ministry's health
of submission on the patient safety commissioner.
Yeah. But Kate, just
that you made the point about understanding,
getting your risk of regulatory failure.
Yeah. How might you do that?
So, um, uh, so I'm quite new here,
so I dunno all the things we currently do measure,
but, um, we, we do want to look at all of the ways in which,
um, our regulatory roles
and the things that maintain quality
and safety in the system, you know, could fail.
What would tell us that they, that they are failing?
What's happening with complaints?
Are we seeing a trend there? Are they individual matters?
You know, are there themes being raised in reports
through clinical, um, Senate or other matters?
And bringing that together in a sort
of an intelligence function to,
to assess when something is more than an
individualized issue.
And then to say, well, right, what's the, what's the right,
uh, you know, action that can be taken on that?
Does it need legislative change?
Does it need further policy work or is it something else?
So that's the way that we would be wanting to work.
And we have some, you know, uh, ways of measuring some
of those things, but not a complete, you know,
way across all the legislation
and regulatory roles at the moment.
And I think probably no regulator
and government would say they have a
complete, a complete view on that. Thanks.
Um, just, just to add to that, uh, one
of the things we have put in place is the regulatory
maturity of each of our regimes,
and we are looking for year on year improvement in that.
And that is, I guess, going to, you know,
the regulatory risk in each of those
Supplementary Ingrid.
Yeah. Um, one of the things we're grappling
with is actually has mentioned is, um, the multiple types
of organizations and accountabilities.
I'm finding that particularly pertinent for mental health.
Mm-hmm. But if I look also at, um, health equity,
we've had an answer from the minister who said, uh,
I think agreed that Maori had different health determinants,
but then had a different answer when it came
to health for all New Zealanders. When we look at
Ingrid, Ingrid, I'm not sure this is a supplementary on
Pre Frameworks, but you can move
to a primary because you're
Up next. Okay. Thank you.
It was just really the, um, the
how are you measuring, given the
strategic intentions mentioned by the minister
about equity targets for Maori or Pacific people
and mental health, because the minister's forward highlights
the inequities and the strategic intentions,
but the annual report doesn't have any ethnic equity men
mental health measures.
So we're kind of seeing a pattern where
things are mentioned
and then there's an expectation that these are going
to be measured by other organizations.
But is it happening particularly with Maori equity?
And it's not just for mental health.
Okay. Actually it's across the board.
Okay. Um, I mean, as I talked about earlier, yes, we do.
We, um, we have, uh, a number of different, uh,
we have access to a lot of, uh, data sets.
Um, and, uh, we do measure, uh, a lot of
outcomes, um, and across different things.
And we actually publish, uh, the health
and independence report, which is a snapshot of some
of the data that we have available, um, in, uh,
in a public setting.
Uh, and we are very interested in, uh, you know, that
that report shows things across age, gender, and ethnicity
and other variables which, um, drive into health outcomes.
Um, I don't know, Kerry, if you wanna talk some more about,
uh, what we do in mental health in particular,
but then we can also, um, John, uh, the head
of Maori Health can also answer, uh,
some specific questions.
Sure. So from a mental health specific question, uh,
going back to, uh, some of what I was saying earlier
around target variation
and variation within performance metrics, um,
we are quite focused on variation by a range of factors.
So district and geography, age, ethnicity is another one.
Uh, and what that data is telling us
for Maori in particular, another problem, uh,
is quite interesting in terms of access patterns
and service responsiveness.
Uh, and, uh, for example,
Maori accessing specialist services at higher rates
and often having liver weight times,
but to that might be indicating a missed
opportunity to intervene earlier.
So from a ministry system monitoring perspective,
those are the sites of insights
or sorts of insights we try
to draw out in our monitoring and analysis.
Another area where we do this is
through the regulatory role.
So under, uh, the Mental Health Act, for example,
and compulsory care, uh,
the data does show disparities in use of compulsory care.
So that is a strong focus of Dr.
Shaw's monitoring, uh, activities, um, both in terms
of tracking those patterns,
but also, uh, interrogating the responsiveness services
and making sure that Health New Zealand is factoring
that into planning, um, and delivery. Thank you.
Regarding, um, life expectancy that's often brought up
as a Maori
and health inequity, um, that lower life expectancies, um,
what trends in the data have you seen
around Maori life expectancy relative
to the general population in recent? Yes.
Uh, life expectancy for all, um, of the cuts
that we do in our main report has been improving, um,
across all of those categories.
But, uh, John, do you have any more specific you'd like to,
Uh, could to memo to committee?
Uh, yes. Generally speaking,
as the director general has covered, um,
life expectancy has improved.
Most recently, the Maori life expectancy gap has reduced
from seven to six years,
but I add to that, that there continues
to be significant work we need
to undertake to keep working at that.
But most recently, as I said, it's pleasingly that,
uh, gap is reducing.
Excellent. Thank you. Johanna,
you have your hand up for a supplementary
Yeah, supplementary on that.
Thank you. Um, Naura, John, um, wanting to, uh,
just unpack that a little bit further in terms of, um,
the gap between Maori and non Maori for life expectancy.
And, uh, what are you seeing in terms of, uh,
the key health issues that still impact, um,
Maori and that gap?
And then further, what are the, what are the initiatives
that you can see that are being rolled out across the system
to address those gaps?
Yes, I think, um, um, we are seeing, uh,
improvements in some areas of Maori health,
but you won't be surprised
to know that that's a varied picture.
Um, as I said, pleasingly overall,
the overall life expectancy gap is reducing.
We are seeing, uh, improvements, for instance, uh,
in things such as smoking.
Uh, our smoking rates have gone down
by 50% in the last five years.
Daily smoking. We are seeing improvements in areas, uh,
for some of our diabetes treatment, for instance.
But back to your point, there are, uh, major conditions, uh,
that account for over three quarters of the mi uh,
years of life lost.
Those for Maori include things such as cancer,
cardiovascular disease, uh,
account for large amounts of that.
So there's quite significant work we're doing
to improve services around those areas.
Uh, there continue to be areas
where we need to do much better.
Immunization is an example of that.
While we have seen, um, some recent improvements,
there's still quite a significant gap
between Maori immunization, particularly for under, uh,
24 months or up to 24 months to Medici and more generally.
So it's a varied picture. Uh, we are seeing improvements,
for instance, in the number of Maori in the workforce, uh,
in areas such as, um, um, uh, doctors in that,
for instance, and pleasingly too.
The majority, over nearly half of those, uh,
Maori doctors coming into the system are under 35.
So they'll be providing a pipeline of, um, um, um,
support to people needing services.
We're seeing, we continue to see, um, high levels
of Maori involvement in health governance.
Uh, I think the last, um, information we had is close to 21%
of those appointed to, and for instance,
and to health entities and governance bodies, uh, Maori.
So those are areas where we can point to areas improvement.
But I feel obliged to say there continues to be, uh,
significant work we need to do, which is why, uh,
we're currently working with the minister
to on the next Maori health strategy,
which will be making sure that we continue to focus
and that we have some continuity and, uh,
and understanding that Maori, uh,
required disproportionate effort from us
and they have disproportionate needs.
Um, thank you. A supplementary on that as well. Yes.
Um, so just to follow up on that, in terms of
that disproportionate burden of, um, you know, Mawi
that we suffer is Kiwi Maori.
Um, can you see,
or do you believe that there is sufficient focus on, um,
Kiwi Maori as a priority population on these issues?
Well, as I said, the, we are currently working through,
uh, with the Mona
and through him, uh, eventually
with cabinet on the next Maori health strategy
that clearly signals that the government sees a need for us
to be continuing to focus
and prioritize Maori health, um, across the board.
And that's important because I think it sends a signal
to the sector that, uh,
there is significant progress we need
to keep undertaking in Maori health.
We need to continue to focus on access to services.
We need to make sure that services are effective
and efficient, uh, and appropriate.
Uh, and we need to focus particularly on areas where Maori,
uh, have, uh, greater need, um,
and require us to be, um, addressing, uh,
shortcomings in current service.
All right. I've got, um, supplementary, oh, sorry,
we got Jennifer a supple, and then I should thank
You. Um,
appreciate you being here.
And, uh, the life expectancy expectancy gap
has decreased from seven to six years.
Yes. Is there anything specific you can point to as to why
that has reduced
Not as a single factor?
I think we would have to look across the range of, um,
activity across Maori health, that,
that looks at the overall population level.
And as I said, ultimately that'll be the big measure
that we all want to achieve.
But I couldn't single out one particular initiative,
but I would point to things, for instance, um,
greater involvement
and engagement with, uh, Maori communities
and Maori organizations, um,
is creating a difference in results and services.
And I think those services coming together aggregate
together to help us improve the life expectancy gap.
Okay. We are seeing things like, um, uh, all cancer
survival has actually improved faster
for Maori than non Maori in the last, um, while.
So, um, you know, in the last 20 years
or so, that's improved by 35% compared
to 28% for the whole population.
So again, fantastically good results
and actually slightly better for Maori than others. And,
And when we say that that number is now six years,
that gap mm-hmm.
Um, is that for male or female? I mean, what
That's across the whole population. Right.
Okay. Okay. We've got some from, yeah,
John, the how do I,
as a interested member of the public, um,
or even member of Parliament, uh, obtained information on
what Iwi Maori partnership boards view
as the local health priorities.
Those, um, uh, are embodied in community health plans.
As I understand it, all of those community health
plans are available.
There are 15 Iwi Maori partnership boards
around the country, and each of them, um, uh,
earlier on this year, they published
and released the community health plans,
Um, just as that are, are those linked
to somewhere on the Ministry
of Health website or do I have to,
Can I can go check? I
check, I thought there was a link on the Ministry
Health, um, website.
I need to check that because certainly we worked
with Health New Zealand
and the Iwi Maori partnership boards when
they finalize those plans.
So we've certainly been through them.
I can't confirm if there's a hot link on the ministry,
Uh, page one. If
not, may I ask as a post hearing question that
save a link to each of those Yes. Plans.
Thank you. I can do that. Yeah.
We've got, uh, primaries from Ingrid, Amish,
Asha and Gro.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I asked the minister about the tutu trust.
We've also seen Ger House close in Auckland,
and we heard a lot about the devolution of decision making,
including financial decisions.
And certainly in the report there are a number
of enabling functions,
but what is missing is, uh,
we don't see total regional budget allocations by region.
Do you, would, what is your expectation around that?
And can these types of decisions genuinely be made locally
if there is no budget allocation within which these
decision makers can work?
Uh, so the intention of, uh, devolution is to create
regional and district level budgets.
Um, uh, like we've always had.
There'll be national services that are funded nationally.
But, uh, the intention of the devolution in, uh,
that the Health New Zealand board is implementing is
that those, uh, budgets will be created for regional
and, uh, district level with, uh, delegations framework
that enables them to make decisions within that, uh,
that is something we'll be monitoring
and keeping a close eye
On. So, am I hearing from
you then
that while this will be enabled in future,
currently those decisions may not have been able
to be made at the local level
because there hasn't been the devolved budgets?
Um, I'm not, uh, entirely Sure exactly
How those budgets have been formed,
but I do know that Health New Zealand has, uh, doesn't,
doesn't just have one pot at national level.
It does have regional and district budgets.
I think the question is about how much control
and decision making people have over those
budgets and what's in them.
Yes. Uh, rather than, um, whether or not they exist.
Because when I talk to ministers,
they say these decisions are operational.
When I talk to people who've spoken to Health New Zealand,
they have not given, they have not expected
that these services will,
and so I'm trying to understand where
the decision making is current.
Sorry, we've got a point of order here.
Is this actually line
of questioning better suit the Health New Zealand rather
than actually the Ministry of Health?
Well, the ministry, if I may speak to the point
of order, speaking to the point of order.
Thank you. The ministry has quite a section
around financial devolution,
and we heard about that from the minister.
So I'm trying to understand what the current situation is.
'cause it feels like we're in a transition
where this will happen,
but decisions have been made that have impacted,
And I'm sure the Director General can say if things are
for Health New Zealand outside of their remit
and in Health New Zealand, then you can call that
Out. Yeah,
Yeah. Happy to look.
I think, um, uh, uh, the, um,
the devolution that is underway is about empowering, uh,
decision makers inside Health New Zealand to be able
to manage more within the budgets they're given.
Uh, they do have budgets, um, in fact, they have, um,
quite a few thousand cost centers.
So, um, and it's, uh, they have had, uh, to,
given their financial position, put, uh, controls in place.
But the devolution is about pushing those things down, um,
and ensuring that people can have more decision
rights over those budgets.
Uh, the, we will, our role will be to monitor the overall,
um, uh, position, uh, that they come to.
Um, and obviously their devolution policy,
what they decide people can decide at different levels will
be a decision for the Health New Zealand board.
Thank, thank you for that answer.
And so, will it be your expectation
that there will be some transparency eventually
around the regional budget allocations?
Uh, yes. We would expect the Health New Zealand,
like any other Crown entity, will be transparent around
what it's, uh, how it sets its budgets and what devolution
and decisions it has in place.
Okay. We've got Hamish and then Asha.
Excellent. Thank you. Um,
and once again, probably gonna ask for a specific question.
Um, there's been a lot of, I,
I do believe the ministry has been doing a lot
of work on fetal alcohol spectrum disorder.
Um, what, what has happened in the last year to help, uh,
people with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder.
Thank you. Yes. Uh, we have been doing some work on that
and, uh, to Andrew Alt.
Can, um, speak to that, the specifics?
Uh, thank you for the question.
So, uh, fetal, uh, alcohol spectrum disorder is
a very significant, uh, challenge.
Um, and, uh, last year, the, um,
we saw an increase in the alcohol levy
for the first time in a number of years,
and the majority of that increase, um, has been dedicated to
services to improve, um, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder.
Um, we published a plan which has, uh, the details of what
that's going to be, uh, spent on, uh, a few months ago.
Um, and, uh, most of that, uh, most
of those services are gonna be delivered, uh,
through, uh, through Health New Zealand.
So they will have, be able to provide a lot more
detail, uh, on that.
And, and what, how, how are you going
to measure the outcome of, of this program?
Yeah, it's a great question.
So, um, one of the, one of the challenges we have
with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is
that diagnoses are often made quite late.
So the, the estimates are somewhere between 1800
and about 3000, uh, children born each year.
Um, but often it's not recognized until later
and the diagnosis is not, uh, is not straightforward.
Uh, so part of the investment is to improve training, uh,
for health professionals and to improve diagnosis
because, uh, like many, uh, health conditions,
particularly lifelong ones, the earlier you can recognize,
uh, the issues that earlier you can get access to, uh,
to appropriate, um, services.
Excellent. Thank you. Okay. All right.
We have a primary from Vera.
Thank you. I have a set of questions around public health.
Uh, what actions,
if any, are the ministry?
Is ministry taking, um, on pandemic preparedness?
Yeah. Thank you. Um, so clearly,
although all of us, I'm sure in this room would quite like
to, uh, forget, uh, the experiences of sort of, uh, 2020
through 2023 ish, um, that does loom large.
It was some good days, Andrew.
Um, that certainly does, does Loom large,
and I think you, you know, it's beholden on us
to, to learn those lessons.
So there is a, there is a big program of work underway.
Uh, one of the things that we learned was that, uh,
our influenza, uh, based pandemic plan was, uh,
not sufficient.
So there has been, uh, work that has gone on this year
to develop a new all of government, uh,
pandemic strategic framework, recognizing that pandemic's,
although caused by, uh, health organisms, uh,
by their nature, become all of government issues.
Uh, so we've developed that, uh,
in consultation with the sector.
We've had expert groups supporting that.
And that is in, it's, uh, that's in a draft state.
Um, we are also, uh, have also been progressing.
Uh, you referred to the, the Ancient Health Act earlier.
So we have been progressing a review of, uh, section three
and four of the Health Act.
Um, again, getting ready for thinking about what some future
advice around legislative changes might look like.
Uh, and we have been supporting, uh, the work
of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID-19, uh,
which is of course due to report, uh, in February,
The phase one has already reported.
Uh, is any of your work, um,
addressing the recommendations of phase one?
Absolutely. So we have, uh, work underway against most,
if not all, of the recommendations from phase one, uh,
noting that, uh, it was, uh, considered an interim report
and the Royal Commissions due
to provide its final report next year,
which the government will be responding to.
Uh, we are progressing work in parallel,
but we'll be, um, making final, um, recommendations
to government with the benefit of the Royal Commission's
Report. A large
number of the recommendations from phase one were
directions for different agencies to have plans.
You mentioned the higher level framework,
but does that work on plans going ahead?
So work on plans, uh, will follow from the framework.
So the idea is that we have, we set the,
the overarching picture
and then individual operational plans
fall out from underneath that.
Uh, the other place where this is intersecting with, uh,
other agencies is through the government's national risk
and resilience framework work, uh, where, uh,
communicable disease is one of the national risks
of catastrophic potential that the Ministry
of Health is responsible for
with pandemic being one of those.
Um, so working, uh, also through that mechanism
to make sure that we are prepared.
So how much, um, we,
where does the public health
surveillance strategy fit in Yeah.
Fit, fit in with that, that work?
Yeah, so I mean, one of the intents, um,
from the health reform
and the, the creation of the public health agency
and the National Public Health Service was
to improve the coordination around, uh, health surveillance.
Uh, one of the, uh, so one
of the foundational pieces was the work
that we published earlier this year on the public health
surveillance strategy, um, that emphasizes the need
for a more systematic approach.
Um, we currently, uh, still have a relatively, um, uh,
fragmented approach to surveillance.
So it's about pulling, uh, making sure that the,
the right people are connected in terms of sort
of governance and accountability,
and that we actually do have a plan that makes sure
that we are measuring all of the things that we need
to be measuring to make sure that we're, uh, well covered,
both for, uh, pathogens of pandemic potential, uh,
but also for a range of other illnesses like, um, measles
and pertussis, et cetera. Dr.
Vera, um, if I may, either within this primary
or not, just ask a few further questions in public health
field around tobacco control.
Uh, can you describe where the advisory groups, um,
work is at now that that report, uh, that, um, set
of recommendations has been delivered?
Yes, absolutely. So you will have seen
that the advisory group, uh, has provided its report
and the Ministry of Health has
provided initial comments on its recommendations.
And those were published, uh, on our website,
uh, last week, I think.
Um, and so we are now in the process
of providing advice to government.
Um, we're looking, uh, that's due to be
provided early next year with recommendations,
uh, coming from that.
One of the interesting, uh, things
that you will have seen in the report, which is one
of the policy challenges in this area is, uh, divergence
of views in the community about the merits of sort
of harm minimization versus harm transfer approaches,
particularly to the use of, um, as it relates to the use
of vaping and other, uh,
alternative nicotine delivery mechanisms.
So that's one of the things that we
are working through carefully.
QI am, um, uh, interested in, in that, um,
is, is just divergence of views the end
of the story,
or can the ministry use evidence to come
to a conclusion on that?
And perhaps you'd like to elaborate on in relation
to oral nicotine products?
So, I mean, the first thing I would say is
that cabinets already agreed in principle
to the introduction of, uh, oral nicotine, uh, products, uh,
assuming that, um, that's done.
And, uh, they're proven to be, uh, appropriate, um,
safety mechanisms
and regulation around them so that, um, that
that decision is there.
Um, one of the challenges is that, uh, whilst the harms of,
uh, tobacco smoking are well known, uh,
and we've got lots of evidence over many, many decades, uh,
the harms as they relate to vaping are still developing.
Uh, we are confident
that the harms from vaping are significantly less than the
harms from smoking, but clearly, uh,
but they're not zero harm,
but exactly quantifying how much harm is challenging.
Uh, that's why the policy settings at the moment are clearly
around if you smoke, uh, then switching to, uh, vaping as a,
as a lower harm alternative, uh, is, is a good thing.
But clearly we don't want people
who don't smoke taking up vaping.
Thank you. That's, um, slightly frustrating
because we went through this whole process of, uh, reaching,
um, uh, understanding
that the nicotine in the vapes itself was addictive,
and let's not, let's put
to one side the emerging evidence about whether the vapes
are, um, damaging your lungs.
There is emerging evidence there,
but I understand that it'll take longer to come through,
but addiction is a health harm, isn't it?
Addiction is a health harm. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and I think the, the distinction here is
that the smoke-free 2025 goal, uh, was based, uh,
the reason why there was, uh, so much support for it
and so much drive towards it was specifically to do
with the harm, uh, associated with the smoking of tobacco.
It wasn't specifically related to the harm from nicotine.
Mm-hmm. Uh, nicotine as an addictive substance.
And the, uh, the psychology
and challenges of addiction, uh, is, uh, is a different,
clearly related, but a different issue, um, that does need
to be thought about, um,
that does need to be thought about carefully
Then. And I
understand your comments about cabinet decisions,
which I am not going to hold you to account for,
but has the ministry got a process for getting
to an evidence-based position on oral nicotine products,
or are we just gonna have the vape situation
for oral nicotine products?
Uh, so the, uh, very conscious that the, the next phase
of advice around, uh, legislative
and regulatory reform needs to be evidence-based.
And so there is a, a formal review of
that evidence underway, which will be
reporting earlier in the new
Year. Is it
your understanding
that nicotine is the most addictive substance?
No.
Uh, it is certainly a very addictive substance,
and I think that's, can you know one more
addictive substance than nicotine?
Uh, power. Sorry.
Very good. Do we have any further primaries?
Thank you very much for your time here.
It's been a big session. I know you were there
through earlier session with minister, um, director General,
and everyone at the ministry appreciate you making yourself
available and for your
candid responses to all of our questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, committee. Thank you all.